

-- 1 of 96 --



-- 2 of 96 --

CAPITAL ALLOCATORS
How the world’s elite money managers lead and
invest
TED SEIDES

-- 3 of 96 --

Contents
Praise for Capital Allocators
About the Author
Acknowledgments
About Capital Allocators
How to Use This Book
Introduction
Active versus Passive
The case for passive management
The case for active management
Part 1: Toolkit
Chapter 1: Interviewing
Defining the purpose
Preparing
Setting the stage
Active listening
Receiving feedback
Additional tips
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 2: Decision-Making
Why this is so hard
Making better decisions
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 3: Negotiations
Preparation
Updating views
Additional tips
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 4: Leadership
Define a vision
Set standards of conduct
Communicate consistently and frequently
Behave authentically
Inspire and motivate
Adapt and evolve
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 5: Management
Hiring
Organizational design
Project management
Talent development
Time management
Summary

-- 4 of 96 --

To learn more
Part 2: Investment Frameworks
Chapter 6: Governance
Roles and responsibilities
Investment committee
Incentives
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 7: Investment Strategy
Purpose
Time horizon
Natural habitat
Policy portfolio
Team structure
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 8: Investment Process
Sourcing managers
Target characteristics
Due diligence
Portfolio construction
Monitoring
Icing on the cake
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 9: Technological Innovation
Asset allocation
Risk measurement
Risk management
Performance assessment
Leading edge of data analytics
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 10: Case Study of Uncertainty
Part 3: Nuggets of Wisdom
Chapter 11: Investment Lessons
Nature of markets
Inconvenient truths
Managing volatility
Investment selection
Gaining an edge
Asset class perspectives
Chapter 12: Life Lessons
Managing emotions
Continuous improvement
Relationships
Work ethic
Facing reality
What matters most
Chapter 13: The Top 10

-- 5 of 96 --

Appendices
Appendix A: Initial Manager Meeting Outline
Background
Investment approach
Initial meeting question list
Appendix B: To Learn More
Interviewing
Decision-making
Negotiations
Leadership
Management
Governance
Investment strategy
Investment process
Data analysis
Appendix C: Directory of Guests on Capital Allocators
Publishing details

-- 6 of 96 --

For the virtuous circle of guests and listeners on the Capital Allocators podcast
And especially for my wife Vanessa, whose enthusiastic support from the front row seat lights up the
stage

-- 7 of 96 --

Praise for Capital Allocators
Through his podcast, Ted has talked with the best investment minds in the world. Capital Allocators assembles this
collective wisdom into an incredible guidebook for anyone who wants to be truly thoughtful about long-term
investing.
– Raphael Arndt, CEO, Australia Future Fund
Capital Allocators is jam-packed with actionable advice from the world’s leading investment experts on topics
ranging from interviewing managers to decision-making. Ted distills the wisdom of his impressive array of podcast
guests into a compendium that deserves highlighting on every page. Take it from me, choosing to read Capital
Allocators is a good decision.
– Annie Duke, former professional poker player, best-selling author, and decision strategist
Ted Seides has achieved a remarkable book that draws on the expertise and experience of a broad cross-section of
industry leaders. He expertly distills interviews that he conducted directly into a book that seamlessly covers
executive, leadership and investment skills and lessons. Capital Allocators is a well-crafted and informative read
for existing and prospective investment professionals as well as for those who work with the investment industry in
any capacity.
– Gregory J. Fleming, President & CEO, Rockefeller Capital Management
A fantastically broad, deep guide to the asset allocator’s world. I wish it had been written 25 years ago. The
quotations in it are alone worth the price. You can quote me on that.
– Andrew Golden, CIO, Princeton University Investment Management Company (PRINCO)
Ted understands the nuance of investment management better than anyone I know, because he’s talked to more
investors than anyone I know. It’s been said that books don’t change minds; sentences do. There are so many good
lines in this book it’s hard to put down.
– Morgan Housel, Partner at Collaborative Fund and best-selling author
Unlike many ‘invest like the best’ books, Capital Allocators does not pretend there is some magical trick that will
turn anyone into an investing genius. Instead, Ted Seides details how great investors do the hard work that leads
to better outcomes. You won’t get rich quick reading this book, but if you take the time to really understand the
lessons it teaches, you will be a better, more thoughtful investor.
– Ben Inker, Head of Asset Allocation, GMO
Capital Allocators is an excellent collection of toolkits and frameworks for investing that reflect both the
institutions and the different styles of their CIOs. Capital Allocators is a starting manual for all the things aspiring
CIOs need to consider as they develop their style and strategic vision. Importantly, Ted acknowledges that there
are many ways to be a successful CIO and that CIOs can learn from each other in that diversity of viewpoints.
– Ana Marshall, CIO, William and Flora Hewlett Foundation
The world of institutional investing needed Ted’s voice – it just didn’t know it yet. With this book, and with his
unparalleled podcast, Ted has brought a whole hidden world to a broader audience, and anyone interested in how
the world’s most prominent investors move money is better for it.
– Kip McDaniel, Editor-in-Chief, Institutional Investor
Ted has made the world of capital allocation approachable for everyone across hundreds of conversations. Now
he’s further distilled the lessons into a package that will make any investor better at what they do. Required
reading.
– Patrick O’Shaughnessy, CEO, O’Shaughnessy Asset Management
This book boils down the most interesting insights and important lessons from the biggest and most powerful
investors on earth – the ones that literally put the capital in capitalism. It offers a glimpse into the thinking of
capital allocators in a coherent and digestible format. It should be required reading for anybody interested in
investing and certainly will be for my students!
– Ashby H. B. Monk, PhD, Executive Director, Global Projects Center, Stanford University
Page by page, Ted Seides’ Capital Allocators brings us tools, frameworks and a rich collection of wisdom captured
from his professional network. Ted’s book allows us to discover how successful CIOs incorporate various aspects of
the investment process and lessons learned in navigating financial markets. This book should be mandatory for any
investment teams aspiring to evolve and win.
– Mario Therrien, Head of Investment Funds and External Management, Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec
I have learned something from every podcast, and this book pulls them all together. There is no one right way to be
a CIO, we are all unique, but there are still lessons that we can learn from one another and value that comes from

-- 8 of 96 --

understanding the nuances among us. Thank you, Ted, for providing a forum for CIOs to share ideas and for
writing this great collection of highlights.
– James Williams, CIO, J. Paul Getty Trust

-- 9 of 96 --

About the Author
Ted Seides, CFA has spent 25 years as an institutional investor, allocating money to managers. He started in 1992
at the Yale University Investments Office, seven years after David Swensen arrived at Yale. Ted spent five years
learning under David’s tutelage and departed to attend Harvard Business School shortly before David wrote the
bible in the industry, Pioneering Portfolio Management.
Ted spent a summer job and two years after business school investing directly at three of Yale’s managers, hedge
fund Brahman Capital, and private equity firms Stonebridge Partners and J.H. Whitney & Company. He learned
that life inside the sausage factory is rarely as clean as the final product appears.
He returned to investing through managers in 2002, co-founding and serving as President and Co-Chief Investment
Officer of Protégé Partners. Protégé was a leading multibillion-dollar alternative investment firm that invested in
and seeded small hedge funds. In 2010, Larry Kochard and Cathleen Rittereiser profiled Ted in the book Top
Hedge Fund Investors, and in 2016 Ted authored So You Want to Start a Hedge Fund: Lessons for Managers and
Allocators to share lessons from his experience.
On a slow day in 2007, Ted had the bright idea to challenge a statement made by Warren Buffett about the
superiority of index funds over hedge funds. With aspirations to demonstrate the value of hedge funds to
institutional portfolios, he initiated a charitable wager with Warren that pitted the 10-year performance of the S&P
500 against a selection of five hedge fund of funds from 2008–2017. Protégé Partners lost the bet, and Ted still
wonders about the probability distribution of outcomes and the quality of his decision process.
In 2017, Ted launched the Capital Allocators podcast, a series of interviews with leading Chief Investment Officers.
The show reached four million downloads in August 2020. Barron’s, Business Insider, ValueWalk, and Forbes each
named it among the top investing podcasts. He also advises asset managers and allocators across business
strategy, audio content, and investing.
Ted writes opinion pieces for Institutional Investor, wrote a blog for the CFA Institute’s Enterprising Investor and
guest publications for the late Peter L. Bernstein’s Economics and Portfolio Strategy.
You can hear Ted’s story in his own words on Capital Allocators episodes 45 (It’s Not About the Money), 34 (Deep
Dive on Hedge Funds), and 5 (The Bet with Buffett).

-- 10 of 96 --

Acknowledgments
My father lost his parents at a young age. His father passed away at age 52, and my dad never thought he would
live a day past that. Still smiling at 87, every day of the last 35 years has offered unexpected upside.
The Capital Allocators podcast has been the same for me. I started it without an objective or goal. Thanks to
incredible guests, engaged listeners, the magic of compounding and optionality, the experience has offered a
cornucopia of upside surprises.
The guests who share their stories are the stars of the show and receive my deepest gratitude. Almost all the
guests who appeared during the first year are friends from my time in the business. Thank you for sharing our
conversations publicly without any expectation of benefit. These talented professionals backed this endeavor with
their time and wisdom and laid the groundwork for what happened since.
Guests repeatedly shared stories of tangible and intangible benefits that accrued to them after coming on the
show. Most hear from old friends and colleagues, and many find it productive for their investing and business. It’s
been gratifying to deliver that goodwill and offer all future guests a hint that positive surprises will come out of
their appearance. As a bonus, for every handful of guests who I didn’t know before the podcast conversation, one
has evolved into a meaningful relationship. I’m so glad we met in this way.
This show has created a virtual community. The audience is just as important as the guests to its strength. An
engaged audience attracts great guests, which in turn helps keep the quality of content high and the audience
growing. Our community of listeners ranges from leading allocators and money managers around the world to
interested students of investing from all walks of life. Thank you for choosing to spend your precious time listening
to the show.
Over the last three years, I’ve received countless notes of thanks. Each one reminds me that this effort is a lot
bigger than me and energizes me to carry on. Thank you for those kind words.
Although I didn’t set out to pursue this adventure as a livelihood, a series of serendipitous circumstances led to
that outcome. I am deeply appreciative to all the advertisers, corporate sponsors, premium content members, and
advisory clients who support the business around the show.
Patrick O’Shaughnessy has been my brother-in-arms on this journey. He has been my sounding board and thought
partner on style, best practices, and the business of podcasting. He is a force of nature, an inspiration, and a
wonderful friend.
Christopher Seifel is the catalyst who made this book happen. A year ago I reached out to my mailing list
(www.capitalallocators.com) to ask for assistance in gleaning the best quotes from each show. Christopher went
above and beyond, outlining each episode with a page and a half of quotes. I had thought about this project for a
while but couldn’t imagine finding the time to go back and review thousands of pages of transcripts. Part 3 of the
book draws heavily on Christopher’s outstanding curation of the episodes.
Connor Aller joined me as an intern two years ago to manage the behind the scenes production of the website and
special projects. He has enthusiastically cranked through everything I asked of him, while performing at the
highest level in his day job. Thanks Connor, I could not have had the bandwidth to take on this project without your
help.
Craig Pearce at Harriman House approached me two years ago offering to publish any book I might consider
writing in the future. He offered an economic partnership and delivered as a true partner in this project every step
of the way. Thank you for your outstanding comments and suggestions that significantly improved the quality of
this book.
Brian Portnoy and Erez Kalir are great friends and accomplished thinkers who graciously commented on a draft of
this book and made it better than it could have been without their keen eyes. I am grateful for your assistance and
friendship.
My wife Vanessa Schenck-Seides has been the wind beneath my wings since the day we met. Neither of us
imagined that life would bring us together as it has, and I am incredibly grateful that it did. Thank you, my love, for
encouraging me and laughing with me every step along the way.
I come from a family of teachers. My mother retired from running a preschool some time ago, and my sister works
with special education students. My father taught graduate school alongside his medical practice for years, and my
brother almost left his career in wireless telecom to teach business school. I always assumed I would find myself in
a classroom. Apparently, I already have. Thank you for attending class each week and for picking up this textbook.

-- 11 of 96 --

About Capital Allocators
Who are these capital allocators and why have conversations with them on the Capital Allocators podcast been
listened to four million times?
Capital allocation is the process of deciding where to invest limited resources. It occurs when corporate executives
decide how to fund operations and initiatives. It occurs when portfolio managers at investment firms select and
size positions. And it occurs when Chief Investment Officers (CIOs) for end owners of capital commit to investment
products. The concept of capital allocation pervades finance and its real-world consequences are far reaching.
I created the Capital Allocators podcast in 2017 to focus on this last group, the people who sit at the top of the
global food chain of capital. When I refer to “allocators” in this book, it is the CIOs and their teams that I have in
mind.
At the bottom of the food chain, businesses are conceived by entrepreneurs. They raise capital to pursue their
ideas by selling a piece of their business or borrowing money with the intent to pay it back. They make business
decisions about which products or services to create, markets to enter, and forms of financing to fund new projects
or return capital. These decisions are important ones in the success of their business. They are also different from
the decisions faced by CIOs.
The middle of the food chain is populated by money managers. When overseeing their business, they make choices
like those of business executives. When producing their product, they make capital allocation decisions like CIOs,
picking investments and constructing portfolios.
CIOs sit at the top of the food chain. Endowments and foundations, high net worth individuals, family offices,
corporate and public pension funds, and sovereign wealth funds are end owners of capital. CIOs lead their
investment operations.
End owners of capital frequently staff their investment team with a small number of professionals. The team
occasionally invests directly in securities or deals, and more frequently allocates capital to the products run by
money managers.
Money managers often specialize in one style of investing. For example, Andreessen Horowitz, or a16z (Scott
Kupor – Capital Allocators, First Meeting episode 7), is a leading venture capital firm and Wellington Management
(Jean Hynes – episode 82) is best known for public equity and fixed income management. Others are
intermediaries, like Outsourced Chief Investment Officer (OCIO) Hirtle Callaghan (Jon Hirtle – episode 98), who
raise capital from end owners and invest it in money management products.
There are so many specialized, well-resourced money managers in different strategies around the world that one
sensible investment approach for CIOs is to identify the best of them across each area of expertise. CIOs partner
with specialists, rather than hire a team to compete with them.
CIOs are students of the entire investment universe. They have a unique vantage point to look across assets,
strategies, and geographies and build a portfolio of investments that best meets their objectives. They assess both
the merits of the money management organization and the attractiveness of the underlying assets held by the
manager. They have access and exposure to talented minds across the investment universe. Their seat is the
broadest and most fascinating in all of investing, and their decisions significantly influence how capital flows
throughout the world.
I started my career working for the most famous CIO in the world, David Swensen, who for 35 years has overseen
the Yale University Investments Office. He is a brilliant investor and gifted teacher. A dozen of David’s protégés
manage some of the largest endowments and foundations.1
In the 20 years after my apprenticeship at Yale, I continued to study money managers across public and private
markets. Three and a half years ago, I created a podcast called Capital Allocators to share conversations with a
range of CIOs around the world. I hoped to learn about different frameworks and best practices for how these
holders of the keys to the kingdom allocate their time and money.
I never expected to write another book. Most first-time authors lose the naïve boon of seeing their name on a book
jacket once they meet the reality that writing a book sucks up time and money, two of the most precious resources
we have. Yet, here I am, sitting in front of my computer, following the serendipity that called me to put pen to
paper once more.
After so many interviews with allocators, managers, and thought leaders – where each had wisdom to share about
how to enhance the investment process – I no longer could retain all the information in my head. David Swensen’s
book remains the seminal tome in explaining the structure of capital allocation of institutional portfolios. This book
is different. It endeavors to explain how these investors implement their craft.
My intent in writing is to help investors make better decisions. Investment success is increasingly challenging with
every passing year, and the breadth of skills required to succeed expands commensurately. The lessons imparted
by guests on the podcast speak to the needed skills and prerequisites for success going forward.
1. My colleagues at Yale included Andy Golden, CIO of PRINCO, Ellen Shuman, former CIO of Carnegie Corp, Donna Dean, former CIO of
Rockefeller Foundation, Mary McLean, former CIO of Kauffman Foundation, Seth Alexander, CIO of MITIMCo, Lauren Meserve, CIO of
Metropolitan Museum of Art, Paula Volent, CIO of Bowdoin College, and Casey Whalen, CIO of Truvvo Partners. Other notable alumni who came
after my time include Robert Wallace, CEO of Stanford Management Company, Kim Sargent, CIO of Packard Foundation, Peter Ammon, CIO of
University of Pennsylvania, Anne Martin, CIO of Wesleyan University and Randy Kim, CIO of Rainwater Charitable Foundation.

-- 12 of 96 --

How to Use This Book
Capital Allocators is a distillation of lessons shared by guests on the first 150 episodes of the Capital Allocators
podcast. It is presented in three distinct parts, each of which can best be digested in its own way.
The introduction tells the story of how the podcast came about and shares my thoughts on the active/passive
debate. If you wholeheartedly believe that passive investing is the way to go, my apologies for having increased
your investment spending by a few bucks. This book is intended for the rest of us.
Part 1 of the book is a toolkit. The chapters cover five necessary functional tools employed by allocators:
interviewing, decision-making, negotiations, leadership, and management. Each of these chapters covers a distinct
skill and can be read on its own. The flow of chapters follows a logical sequence, but you won’t miss a beat hopping
to the chapter that catches your eye.
Part 2 turns to the craft of investing. It is a set of investment frameworks summarizing how modern allocators
think about and conduct the investment process. The chapters discuss governance, investment strategy,
investment process, technological innovation, and a case study on dealing with uncertainty. The structure follows
the thought process of CIOs from the 10,000-foot level down. I wrote it to be read sequentially, although you
certainly can take a lot away from each chapter read individually if you choose.
Parts 1 and 2 just scratch the surface on these tools and frameworks of investing. The end of each chapter contains
recommendations for podcasts, online resources, and books to take the next step in the learning process. Appendix
B repeats these recommendations in one place.
Throughout these sections, ideas and quotes from guests on the show add color to the concepts. By convention, I
have included the place of work for each guest the first time they are mentioned in the body of the text. Appendix
C contains a full directory of guests, including their title or role.
Part 3 is full of quotes from the guests themselves. The research for writing this book entailed whittling 3,500
pages of transcripts down to a few hundred quotes. Many of those ideas shaped the toolkit and investment
framework sections. One hundred and eighty-four of the remaining nuggets of wisdom are presented in this
section. Read them as you see fit – straight through, one at a time, by topic, or whenever you seek some
inspiration. The last chapter is a top 10 list of the best quotes from 150 hours of conversations.
Capital Allocators: How the world’s elite money managers lead and invest is the reference manual for investing
that I want to have on my desk.
I hope you find it the same.

-- 13 of 96 --

O
Introduction
“Did you find the podcast, or did the podcast find you?”
– Michael Mervosh
n a wintry day in February 2016, I sat on a chairlift at Haystack Mountain in Vermont with my friend Gregg
Clark. Gregg is a warm-hearted guy who I’m quite sure could be a world champion on Jeopardy. He holds
encyclopedic knowledge of both the useful and useless, equally facile in the arcane details of financial models and
the wisdom of the Toltec culture. An engineer by training, Gregg saw one weekend that the full-sized electronic
bowling alley in the ski lodge had stopped working. He heard the manufacturer couldn’t repair it until Monday, so
he took the manual overnight and fixed it himself the next morning.
As we rode our way up the mountain, Gregg asked if I listened to podcasts. At the time, I had barely heard of a
podcast and didn’t know the purple app on my iPhone existed. He directed me to The Tim Ferriss Show, and I was
hooked.
Around the same time, my first book So You Want to Start a Hedge Fund: Lessons for Managers and Allocators
released. After 14 years focused on sourcing, researching, and investing in early-stage hedge funds, I had acquired
a body of knowledge about the ecosystem that few aspiring entrepreneurs in the industry understood. I noticed I
was having the same conversation repeatedly and decided to put pen to paper so more people could learn from the
past lessons of others.
The book also marked the end of a chapter in my professional life. I was keen to leave a narrowly siloed world of
investing in small hedge funds and get back to a broader mandate akin to where I started my career.
In this window of transition, I received invitations to share the lessons of the book publicly. I appeared on
television, radio, and lo and behold, a series of podcasts. One podcast conversation stood out. In October 2016, I
sat down to speak to Patrick O’Shaughnessy in what became the seventh episode of his podcast, Invest Like the
Best. I was blown away by his preparation and ability to ask just the right questions. We became fast friends.
The experience with Patrick demystified what happens behind the curtain of podcasting. We met in his office and
had a conversation in front of two microphones. It seemed as simple as that.
A short time afterwards, I saw a Facebook post that my college friend Chris Douvos was a guest on a different
podcast. Chris is the highly entertaining ‘Super LP’ of venture capital and founder of Ahoy Capital. I listened and
was appalled. The questioning was so rote and scripted and the energy so low that the hosts managed to make
Chris sound dull. If you listen to my conversation with Chris (Capital Allocators, Ep.14), you’ll understand that it’s
quite a feat to crush his energy.
That day, a lightbulb went off in my head. I had time on my hands and wanted to reconnect with some of my old
friends who I didn’t have time to see in the day-to-day grind of managing money. I aspired to interview with
Patrick’s natural dexterity, and I figured I could do better than the folks who interviewed Chris.
I created a podcast interviewing people who are tasked with managing large pools of capital. I called Patrick to
inquire about how it all worked. He sent me on a voyage to purchase a laundry list of equipment, record a few
conversations, and connect with Mathew Passy to assist with the production. Off I went.
I recorded a fantastic conversation with my friend Steve Galbraith, who had written the foreword for So You Want
to Start a Hedge Fund. I guided the conversation through Steve’s remarkable career and filtered in fun stories
about his owning a local brewery and European football team. I couldn’t believe how well the conversation went
and was excited to share it.
There was only one problem. I lost the recording.
For the next six hours I couldn’t find the recording on my H6 Handy Recorder. I searched the internet for a
solution, called customer service at the manufacturer, and reached out to Mathew. All of it was to no avail. I was
about to declare the end of my nascent podcasting venture when I thought of calling Gregg Clark, the one person
who might have an answer when no one else did. Sure enough, Gregg hooked up the device to his computer,
plugged in a few extra wires, hit play, and an hour and 11 minutes later downloaded a perfect digital recording of
the episode out of thin air.
Before launching the podcast, I recorded two more conversations with dear friends. One was with André Perold,
my former business school professor. The other was with Paula Volent, my former colleague and star endowment
manager at Bowdoin College. A week later Paula called to inform me that she couldn’t get permission to put it on
air. My plan to launch with three episodes got cut by one-third just like that.
I released the episodes with Steve and André and sent an email to friends in my contacts. Two hundred of them
listened to one of the initial episodes. From there, I asked some friends to join me for an interview. A few
conversations turned into a few more and three and a half years later, here we are.
* * *
That’s the chronological story of how the podcast came together, but there’s another side to the story that is
harder to explain. Michael Mervosh described a different way of moving through the world during our podcast
conversation. He posed the question, “Did I find the podcast, or did the podcast find me?”
The podcast journey was one of the first times in my life that I took on a professional challenge without a goal in
mind. I thought it would be a fun and productive way to spend some time while searching for my next full-time

-- 14 of 96 --

engagement. If nothing else, I suspected the adventure would create some optionality, even if I had no idea what
those options might be.
I was full of doubts when getting started. The only thing I knew for sure was that I didn’t like the sound of my own
voice and was fairly confident others wouldn’t either. I didn’t know if I would interview well or if I would be able to
keep a conversation flowing. I wondered if I would run out of guests to interview, of subjects to discuss, or of time
to keep going. And I never once thought of the podcast as a business, as even a cursory level of analysis would
have suggested that offering content for free to a finite natural audience is not a road to riches. But I really didn’t
care about that, because I was ready to try something new without feeling tied to an outcome.
As a result, I can’t explain what happened over the last three and a half years. I sent out one email, started posting
episodes on my empty LinkedIn and Twitter accounts, and through word-of-mouth the 200 downloads that first
week grew to 20,000× that number in a trajectory that looks like a stock chart presented in thousands of manager
pitchbooks.
WEEKLY DOWNLOADS OF CAPITAL ALLOCATORS2
I started receiving positive feedback from old friends and new. Some commented on my excellent “voice for radio,”
rebuffing the only definitive prior I held. Others reflected an interview style of humility and curiosity that I would
describe as a mirror of my best self. Most importantly, the podcast guests universally derived value from the
experience, commenting on the platitudes and unexpected benefits they received after coming on the show. I loved
being in the business of building goodwill.
As I released episodes one week after the next, I started to realize I had come across an educational platform
unlike anything else available. I had the privilege of working with many top-flight investors in my two decades of
experience, and 45 of the first 50 podcast guests were friends and peers from that time.
I hadn’t quite appreciated how little these insightful investors were in the public eye. One of my favorite examples
came from Jim Williams, the long-time CIO of the Getty Trust. Following our conversation, Jim mentioned how
much he had learned from the podcast with his peer, Scott Malpass, the recently retired CIO of Notre Dame
University. I was surprised, knowing that the two had been friends for decades. Jim explained that although they
speak a few times a year, he never before had the chance to hear Scott’s story in its entirety. At that moment, I
realized that I hadn’t either, nor had just about anyone else.
My guiding light in building the roster of guests has been answering the questions of who I am curious to speak to
now, and what I would like to learn. I love hearing personal stories – investing is indeed a people business – so all
the episodes start that way. Many guests fit into my original concept of diving into the people, philosophy, and
process of the holders of the keys to the kingdom in asset management. I’ve also explored other disciplines that
help allocators of capital think about improving their skill set.
Three years into this adventure, the podcast has gone beyond my expectations and been great fun. I’ve had
wonderful conversations with brilliant thinkers and met incredible people along the way. It has proven a fruitful
exercise in what Patrick has dubbed “growth without goals.”
Before we get to the lessons from the many guests on the show, I want to share some thoughts about the active vs.
passive debate. The podcast and this book are entirely about the pursuit of active management through allocation
to money managers. Critics of active management think this entire pursuit is a folly. I disagree, so let me tell you
why.
2. Libsyn hosting service. Calculated as a rolling four-week average of weekly downloads.

-- 15 of 96 --

C
Active versus Passive
“Only a fool would enter lightly into a wager against the Oracle of Omaha, especially when he has put his
judgment about an important investment matter to the test.”3
– Ted Seides (yes, that was me)
The case for passive management
apital markets finished 2019 with a decade of exceedingly strong returns. A simple, traditional 60% stock/40%
bond portfolio in the United States generated 11% per annum for the decade, far surpassing the 7–8% annual
spending needs of most institutions.
Active managers by and large underperformed the indexes during this period, with 87% of active U.S. equity
managers falling short of the returns of the S&P 500.4 This single, often cited statistic simplifies a more nuanced
comparison, which could include active strategies across geographies, capitalization, style, and capital structure.
But the point is clear. The decade did not shine brightly on the asset management industry.
If there was a winner in the mix, it was The Vanguard Group. The king of passive management and one of three
firms comprising the lion’s share of index products,5 Vanguard became synonymous with its low-cost investing
philosophy. The organization grew from $1 trillion6 to $6.2 trillion in assets under management since the onset of
the financial crisis.7
I was at the forefront of the active-passive debate in a public setting. In 2007 I initiated a ten-year bet with Warren
Buffett that pitted Vanguard’s S&P 500 index fund against a portfolio of high-cost hedge funds, represented by the
selection of five hedge fund-of-fund products. Carol Loomis chronicled the initiation of the bet in a Fortune
magazine article.8 At the time, my partners and I assessed our chances of winning at 85%; Warren put his odds at
60%.
I wrote a white paper describing my rationale for making the wager at the time.9 Stocks appeared priced at
historically rich valuations in 2007, and hedge funds seemed a good alternative to help institutional investors meet
spending needs. The comparison of a stock market to a portfolio of hedge funds is like comparing apples to
oranges, owing in part to different market exposures, risk, and tax treatment. Nevertheless, it seemed a good bet
to make at the time.
Suffice it to say, the bet did not turn out well for the hedge fund side of the ledger. It launched on January 1, 2008
and only 14 months later, the hedge funds held a lead of approximately 50%. Once the Fed backstopped the market
in March 2009, there may not have been another quarter in the subsequent 8¾ years in which hedge funds
outperformed the soaring S&P.
If identical circumstances to those in 2007 presented today, I would still make the bet. I reviewed my decision-
making process employing some of the tools described in Chapter 2, Decision-Making, and spoke to Warren about
his process at the time. I believe the decision to bet on hedge funds was a good one.
Some of the smartest people I know in the business don’t agree. Charley Ellis, the venerable founder of Greenwich
Associates and author of 16 books on investing, first wrote about the power of indexing in 1985 in his seminal
tome, Investment Policy: Winning the Loser’s Game.10 He argued 35 years ago that so many smart, hard-working
active investors were flooding the market that together they would offset each other. As a result, owning the
market through an index fund was a better strategy.
In 2016, Charley published The Index Revolution: Why Investors Should Join It Now. Thirty-one years after his
initial description, he presented a series of compelling facts describing the same phenomenon. The surge in CFA
Charterholders, the ubiquity of data, and the speed at which information is disseminated has created what Michael
Mauboussin of Counterpoint Global refers to as the paradox of skill. Yes, the absolute skill of investors is higher
than it has ever been, but the breadth of that skill across so many outstanding participants has narrowed the
relative skill against each other. It is harder to outperform the market than it has ever been.
Passive management proponents all point out that investing in the public markets is a zero-sum game. For every
investor who wins, another must lose. In aggregate, active managers earn the market return and charge a fee
along the way, turning the zero sum game into a negative sum game.
The case for active management
The case for passive management is nearly bulletproof in theory. It is also nearly irrelevant in the practice of
institutional asset management today. From here onwards, a simple 60/40 portfolio of U.S. stocks and bonds is
unlikely to generate sufficient returns to meet spending needs. Stepping outside of that passive portfolio requires
skill to succeed.
After the surge in stocks and bonds for a decade, capital market pricing leaves little juice to squeeze out of the
lemon. Consider the following metrics as of October 31, 2020: The 10-Year US Treasury yields 0.9%, dividend yield
on the S&P 500 is 2%, and the projected long-term growth rate of earnings of the S&P 500 is 6%. Holding future
valuation multiples constant, a rough estimate of the long-term nominal expected returns of a 60/40 portfolio in the
U.S. is a touch below 5% per annum.
Money manager GMO believes high valuation multiples will not remain constant and the outlook is much worse. Its
seven-year asset class forecast incorporates expectations for a reversion to the mean to lower market multiples

-- 16 of 96 --

and profit margins. The same 60/40 mix in GMO’s projections results in a –4% annual real return as of October 31,
2020, or approximately a –2% nominal return at breakeven inflation rates.
When an institution looks out over the next decade, they will find that a 60/40 portfolio of U.S. stocks and bonds
won’t do the trick. Endowments and foundations typically target 5% real returns (6–7% nominal). Pension funds
have 7–8% actuarial rates of return. Any reasonable projections of a passive 60/40 stock-bond portfolio won’t keep
up with spending needs.
Further, the implementation of an investment strategy beyond a traditional 60/40 mix requires active decisions. A
CIO must consider which markets to own, which indexes to employ, and in what proportions. Charley Ellis himself
discussed these challenges in our two podcast conversations. While staunchly supporting index fund management,
Charley noted that active management is preferable in emerging markets and probably in Europe too. Selecting
active managers is also required to participate in private equity and venture capital. Charley is passionate about
the index fund movement, but he is equally passionate about the unusual success of Capital Group, Yale University,
and Vanguard – that is, the little-known team at Vanguard that selects active managers, not the indexing
juggernaut itself.
Lastly, passive management is a rounding error when considering how the most successful allocators in the world
apply their trade. The Yale University endowment is one example. Only 10% of Yale’s policy portfolio is allocated to
U.S. stocks, bonds and cash, and only approximately 14% more is invested in international equities. The remaining
76% of Yale’s portfolio is invested in assets that have no readily accessible index fund to earn low-cost, easy-to-
access returns.
Yale is playing a completely different game than that easily available to individuals, and so are the other CIOs
around the world who have appeared on Capital Allocators. The staunch proponents of index fund management
might want to consider why some of the smartest people in the business have independently chosen to pursue
strategies that cannot be indexed. Perhaps the wisdom of this crowd is entirely wrong and investment success is
easy, but I doubt it.
Albert Einstein once said, “Everything should be made as simple as possible, but no simpler.” I believe the
active/passive debate is full of nuance that is lost in proclaiming the failure of active management. Both active and
passive are valuable tools that can serve important purposes in achieving investment success.
Active management success is far from a foregone conclusion. It requires atypical skill from managers, a keen eye
and an extensive professional network to spot those skills from an allocator, and a lot of work by both to stay ahead
of the crowd. It requires a set of learned tools, skill sets, and insights beyond anything available in academic
literature.
This book is decidedly about the active management process – how the holders of the keys to the kingdom allocate
their time and their capital to meet the needs of their institutions. Make no bones about it: investment success
going forward will require making outstanding decisions about asset allocation, manager selection, and security
selection. Passive investing is poorly positioned to meet spending needs, and active management is increasingly
competitive. We need to take this craft as seriously as ever. Attempting to do so without the requisite skill set at
your disposal is a recipe for underperformance.
If you agree, let’s turn to the set of tools that capital allocators need to maximize their chance of success.
3. “A Bet Against Buffett – Can Hedge Funds Beat the Market,” White Paper, Ted Seides, July 2008 (capitalallocatorspodcast.com/A-Bet-Against-
Buffett.pdf).
4. Data from eVestment and NEPC.
5. Alongside Blackrock and State Street.
6. Adi Sunderam, Allison M. Ciechanover, and Luis M. Viceira, “The Vanguard Group, Inc. in 2015: Celebrating 40,” Harvard Business School
case study 9-216-026. Rev. May 30, 2017.
7. www.vanguard.com as of January 31, 2020.
8. Carol J. Loomis, “Warren’s Big Bet,” Fortune, June 23, 2008.
9. capitalallocatorspodcast.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/A-Bet-Against-Buffett.pdf
10. Charles D. Ellis, Investment Policy: Winning the Loser’s Game, Dow-Jones, Irwin, 1985.

-- 17 of 96 --

Part 1: Toolkit

-- 18 of 96 --

When I joined private equity firm Stonebridge Partners after business school, Bob Raziano was the lead operating
partner at the firm. Bob had been one of the youngest partners at consulting firm Booz Allen and rose to the role of
Chief Financial and Administrative Officer at CS First Boston before joining Stonebridge. I remember visiting a
manufacturer of metallized paper with him and marvelling at his ability to systematically break down every aspect
of the business during due diligence. I asked if he used a checklist. He responded that his apprenticeship in
management consulting early in his career was like being handed a ruler to measure how to dissect companies.
Similarly, CIOs need a set of tools to break down the complex task of managing large pools of capital. Talented
CIOs are skilled at both listening carefully and speaking in public, both learning and educating, both thinking
independently and orchestrating a group, both managing a team and a governance board, and each of reading,
writing and arithmetic. The best ones are the equivalent of Major League Baseball’s five-tool players.
Acquiring such a broad set of skills draws on many different disciplines. The interviews on the podcast with CIOs,
investment managers, and thought leaders from outside of the investment industry collectively teach best
practices around each of these skills.
These lessons are not found in the readings in the CFA program, CAIA curriculum, or other investment materials.
Just as my first book, So You Want to Start a Hedge Fund, shares case studies about start-up hedge funds from the
front lines, this section describes skill sets that are only encountered in practice. Importantly, these chapters do
not present definitive research on the topics. They are a compilation of lessons gleaned from my experiences and
those of guests on the show.
The toolkit in Part 1 explores the major disciplines required of CIOs:
Interviewing
Decision-making
Negotiations
Leadership
Management
We’ll start with interviewing, a practice that allocators engage in just about every day.

-- 19 of 96 --

T
Chapter 1: Interviewing
“I’ve learned that people will forget what you said, people will forget what you did, but people will never
forget how you made them feel.”
– Maya Angelou
he core interaction in the investment process is a series of interviews. Across 20 years in the business, I
conducted interviews with money managers two or three times a day, totaling thousands. In all that time, I only
peripherally thought about the process of interviewing until I started the podcast.
The lessons I learned by studying professional interviewers and conducting podcasts over the last three years
follow this process:
Defining the purpose
Preparing
Setting the stage
Listening actively
Receiving feedback
Additional interviewing tips
In the investment world, these lessons are applicable to manager interviews and reference checking.
Defining the purpose
Interviews are different from conversations. Conversations are casual discussions between people. They are back
and forth interactions often balanced in airtime.
Interviews are conversations with a purpose. For the most part, interviewers ask the questions and interviewees
answer. An allocator’s purpose in a manager interview is to gather information and evaluate the manager on both
content and persona. CIOs seek to confirm or refute the validity of their hypothesis for investing in the manager. At
the same time, each interview offers an opportunity to learn about social interactions and trustworthiness for a
partnership that may last years or decades. These interviews require focus and attention in every aspect of the
conversation.
That purpose sounds straightforward, but we’ve all experienced ineffective meetings in which the objective gets
subjugated to an allocator peacocking by expressing their views to prove their intellectual worth. Tom Bushey
found in his initial market meetings for Sunderland Capital that probably two-thirds of the people interviewing him
told him why what he was doing was ludicrous and how they would do it instead.
A podcast interview is different. I discuss many of the same subjects I did when interviewing as an allocator, but
evaluation is no longer my objective. I let CIOs and investment managers tell their stories, and I have no need to
decide if I want to invest with them afterwards.
Other forms of interviewing carry a different purpose and call on different skills. Jon Wertheim has written and
conducted interviews for Sports Illustrated and 60 Minutes for 25 years. His interviews have sought quotes for
stories, entertainment for television, and facts for journalistic investigations. When filling a story with a quote, Jon
wants just one nugget. A half-hour conversation can be horrible for 29 minutes, but if the subject gives a sound
bite when wrapping up, he will have accomplished his mission. He may purposefully express boredom, excitement
or provocation, all in the interest of getting one little gem.
His television interviews are the opposite. The medium requires a cadence and flow throughout that matters as
much as the material. If the interviewer and subject interrupt each other, the television viewing will be poor and
will usurp otherwise great content.
Investigative journalism is different again. Conducting research for a story requires in-depth probing and verbal
interrogation techniques where substance matters more than style.
The style and techniques of interviewing across podcasts, stories, television, and investigations are all different
from the evaluative interviews conducted by allocators. At the same time, the different disciplines share common
techniques that are effective across the board and useful for allocators to improve their skills for evaluating
managers.
Preparing
Sitting in-between managers and clients as the co-CIO of a fund of funds, I was stunned how frequently interviews
took place with no prior preparation. Time in front of managers is limited. Wasting that time drawing out easily
accessible information that could have been learned in advance is highly inefficient.
Great interactions come from preparing to blend structure and flow in the conversation. Interviewing legends
Larry King and Cal Fussman take different approaches that both rely on detailed preparation. Larry conducts
research and develops an outline for the interview. He never contemplates specific questions ahead of time.11 Cal
does his research by creating a long list of interview questions, picking out a few of his favorites, reading them

-- 20 of 96 --

carefully, and then throwing away the list before he conducts the actual interview. He plans for the conversation
without getting anchored to specific questions.12
I had the opportunity to vary my degree of preparation across podcast interviews. In the first few podcasts, I
massively overprepared. I created long question lists and brought them into the session with me. In the actual
interview, the question list was a weighty anchor. I glimpsed at it often to make sure I didn’t miss anything,
distracted myself, and whiffed on asking obvious follow-up questions as a result. That over-preparation created a
rigid agenda that took me away from being present and in the flow of the conversation.
The more I backed off prepared questions, the more I trusted my instincts to follow up with questions in a
dialogue. At one point, I grew sufficiently comfortable that I toyed around with skipping my preparation entirely. I
underprepared and got by, but I knew the interview would have been better if I had put in the work. I ultimately
found a sweet spot in preparing outlines for the flow of conversation and steering clear of specifics, blending a
structure with open space to allow the conversation to flow naturally.
Allocators can similarly do homework in advance of a meeting to discover areas of exploration. This preparation
includes reading all available materials and past meeting notes, determining an objective for the meeting, and
structuring the meeting to elicit information. In Appendix A, I share a sample outline and Cal Fussman-like set of
questions to help prepare for a first meeting with a long-short equity hedge fund manager.
Meeting objectives may vary. Early meetings focus on information gathering and getting to know the principals.
Meetings with long-standing managers in a portfolio may dive into a specific investment, theme or organizational
issue. Each meeting may call for a different set of questions, depending on the investment strategy, team, process,
and risk appropriate to implement that strategy.
Allocators also consider the organization of the meeting itself – who is attending from both sides, who will lead the
questioning, and how will they interpret verbal responses and body language. Conducting manager interviews with
more than one person expands the team’s bandwidth to divide and conquer, with one focusing on questions and
content and another on behavior and style.
Setting the stage
Manager interviews are designed to gather information, so talented allocators can create an environment to elicit
as much information as possible. People open up when they are at ease. The physical setting of the interview can
be an important factor in the tone of the discussion.
Most manager meetings take place across the table in a conference room, a directly confrontational set-up. Over
time, allocators find ways to spend time with managers away from that setting. Scott Malpass regularly invited
managers to attend Notre Dame football games. Jon Harris of Alternative Investment Management goes out to
dinner with a manager and their spouse or significant other in advance of allocating capital. CIOs exercise, play
sports, and attend cultural or charity events with managers to learn more about their personality. I once backed
away from an investment after playing golf with a manager and observing how abysmally he treated the caddie.
The outing helped explain why his organization had experienced an unsettling amount of personnel turnover.
Beyond the physical setting, an allocator’s tone and style in the interview can also influence the manager’s degree
of openness. Allocators can consider a number of shared lessons that help foster a productive chemistry in
manager meetings.
1. Find common ground
We are inclined to embrace those who are like us. Discovering commonality across backgrounds, relationships, or
interests at the onset of a meeting can go a long way towards shifting the tone of the interview from transactional
to relationship-oriented.
2. Ask simple, brief questions
Jon Wertheim discovered that simple and brief questions are the most effective across all formats. He noted:
It’s taken me way too long to learn that sometimes less is more, and a simple question and letting the
subject fill in any silence is better than jumping in and trying to prove that you belong at the table.
He further suggests avoiding a common temptation to show how much research you’ve done and how smart you
are. Remembering that at the end of the day, it’s about a connection.
3. Start with how, what, or why?
Open-ended questions that start with How, What, or Why provide space for managers to tell their story. By
phrasing questions in a way that encourages broad answers, allocators can glean information beyond the
particulars of the question they had in mind.
4. Let people talk
My uncle used to say, “You have two ears and one mouth, so listen twice as much as you speak.” It is amazing what
you can learn when you let people talk. If the purpose of conducting an interview is to learn, then it should follow
that allocators listen far more than they speak.
5. Express humility

-- 21 of 96 --

Investing is a humbling business, even for the best managers. Allocators can similarly be humble. The best
interviewers are not afraid to ask naive questions. Asking for help to better understand the basics is a welcoming
approach.
6. Be curious
An allocator’s job offers the gift of continuous learning. Approaching interviews from an inquisitive perspective
rather than an evaluative one allows allocators to take in all the information available from a manager. Tom Russo
at Gardner Russo & Gardner has a knack for remembering details of his conversations. When he hears something
surprising, he regularly follows up with personal notes recalling those facts.
7. Lose the script
The best interviews flow unpredictably. Thorough preparation includes an outline and list of questions, but sticking
too closely to a prescribed Q&A will create distractions from hearing what the manager is saying and asking clever
follow-up questions.
Active listening
Once the preparation is complete and the meeting begins, great interviewers become great listeners. Charley Ellis
describes the importance of listening to the success of Capital Group:
John Lovelace had a very strong interest in helping people learn how to be very good at listening. Not
listening to hear what was said, but listening to hear what was meant and what was different from last
time. That’s very helpful when you’re trying to learn about companies, but it’s also great when you’re
working with the other folks preparing to make a decision for the fund.13
Listening to learn is at the heart of a successful interview. It entails clearing your mind of distractions, being
present, and paying attention to what the subject is saying without reacting. Listening gets blocked when thoughts
pop into your head, and you can’t let them go. The set of tools to listen actively in an interview include noting
distractions, mirroring, validating, and empathising.
1. Noting distractions
Listening without cluttering your mind with thoughts is challenging. Like a meditation practice, noting when your
mind drifts and bringing it back to the conversation keeps an interviewer focused on the content at hand.
2. Mirroring
I first got exposed to mirroring at a relationship workshop taught by Harville Hendrix nearly 20 years ago. Since
then, I found the same concept as a core tenet of communication across casual conversation, spousal relationships,
business decision-making, and hostage negotiation. Interviewing managers is another use case for mirroring.
Mirroring is parroting back what someone says, although it sounds a lot simpler than it is in practice. Good follow-
up questions often arise spontaneously from something an interview subject has just said. By repeating back parts
of their thoughts, you can ensure you have listened and let them know they have been heard. Mirroring leverages
neural resonance, slows down the pace of conversation, and softens emotional triggers. As a result, it creates a
magically safe space to communicate.
3. Validating
Validation is the process of letting the other person know that what they said is logical. Whether or not you agree
with the points made, you can confirm that they have followed a sensible thought process.
Effective validation requires presence. Oftentimes, we have a different opinion about what the interviewee is
saying and react. The trick in validating is confirming their perspective without needing to agree with it.
4. Empathizing
Expressing emotional empathy can open up an interviewee to discuss difficult subjects. Empathy is often the
antithesis of what investors expect to encounter in the world of money, as it moves away from thoughts and
touches on feelings.
Receiving feedback
Most investment professionals are not frequent solicitors of feedback, in stark contrast to participants in most
high-performance fields. Elite athletes have coaches and business executives have boards and reviews, but
investment managers carry on independently in their own bubble.
Among the podcast interviews I have conducted, only two guests went out of their way to explicitly request
feedback on their performance. Who are those two you ask? Author and former poker champion Annie Duke and
Farnam Street creator Shane Parrish – two experts in human behavior and decision-making. Having studied the
field, they know the importance of receiving feedback.
Conducting post-mortems on interviews can be a valuable tool for both podcasting and investing. Podcasts are

-- 22 of 96 --

recorded interviews, which gives me the opportunity to listen back and critique my work afterwards. I regularly
listen to my interviews to spot my ever-changing flaws, and periodically ask others to do the same. I frequently
unearth different inflections in the sound of my voice, missed questions, and verbal tics. I figured out that asking a
compound question usually results in the guest only answering the second part of the question, and that
shortening questions prevents me from influencing the guest’s answer. Similarly, allocators can debrief about
manager interviews with team members to critique their performance.
Additional tips
Some of the most effective interviewing techniques come from one-off tips. The five whys, favorite questions of
guests, and the application of interviewing tools to conducting reference checks are among the most useful in a
CIO’s arsenal.
1. The five whys
For decades, Japanese manufacturers were the best in the world, and Toyota was renowned for its Production
System. I read a case study in business school on Toyota that included a discussion of the “Five Whys.” To get to
the root of a problem, the manager on a production line asked questions starting with the word “why” five times.
Taiichi Ohno, the former Executive Vice President of Toyota Motor and pioneer of the Toyota Production System in
the 1950s, offers this example.14
1. Why did the robot stop?
The circuit was overloaded, causing the fuse to blow.
2. Why was the circuit overloaded?
There was insufficient lubrication on the bearings, so they locked up.
3. Why was there insufficient lubrication on the bearings?
The oil pump on the robot was not circulating sufficient oil.
4. Why was the pump not circulating sufficient oil?
The pump intake was clogged with metal shavings.
5. Why was the intake clogged with metal shavings?
Because there was no filter on the pump.
Each question in Ohno’s example mirrors a piece of the answer to a previous question. The Five Whys is rooted in
the Japanese concept of kaizen, or continuous improvement.
2. Favorite questions
Allocators investigate the key drivers of a manager’s success as they move along in the process. Some popular
topics explore a manager’s incentives, competitive advantage, self-awareness, culture, competitive landscape, and
expectations. Allocators cleverly ask simple questions, hiding the in-depth thought process that qualifies the
answers. Guests on the show have shared some of their favorite questions below. Those without attribution are
some of mine.
a. Incentives
“Are you still having fun?” – Adam Blitz
“How do you invest your personal capital?”
Adam Blitz at Evanston Capital asks a generic question to assess continued motivation. He listens to detect the
manager’s passion for and engagement in the business and to hear what they choose to talk about.
Aligning incentives is the most important feature of an external manager relationship, and a manager’s personal
investment alongside clients is the most direct form of that alignment. Perspectives differ on the appropriate
amount a manager should invest, however most agree that the amount should be substantial and serve to align risk
tolerance. Doing so creates an “alignment of appetites” according to Andy Golden at Princeton University
Investment Management Company. Probing about a manager’s other personal investments can shed light on their
risk tolerance and on other potentially attractive investment opportunities.
b. Competitive advantage
“What is your superpower?” – Mario Therrien
“What is your edge and why is it enduring?” – Bill Spitz
“What is the compulsion that keeps you going?” – Patrick O’Shaughnessy
“If you could brag about something exceptional without fear of appearing arrogant, what would that be?” –
Jason Karp
Teasing out what makes a manager different and special can be difficult to ascertain by asking rote questions.
Thoughtfully worded questions set the table for managers to reveal subtle differences in their approach and
expertise.

-- 23 of 96 --

c. Self-awareness
“What’s the best piece of feedback or criticism you’ve ever gotten from one of your partners and how did
you apply those lessons?” – Chris Douvos
“Do you have any questions for me?” – Doug Phillips
“What would your former partners/analysts say about you?”
Great managers are self-aware and continuously improving. Questions that focus on where they are in their
journey help allocators understand their mental dexterity. Doug Phillips at the University of Rochester Endowment
throws out the seemingly innocuous question at the end of interviews as a test of a manager’s innate
inquisitiveness.
d. Process
“Tell me about an idea that you did a ton of research on but did not ultimately make it into the portfolio?” –
Brian Portnoy
“Which position in your portfolio is least reflective of your investment style?” – Jason Klein
“Tell me about a time when you failed epically.” – Jenny Heller
“What do you know now that you wish you knew 10 years ago?” – Mark Baumgartner
“Every manager has been terminated. Which three of your clients most recently terminated your firm and
why?” – Charley Ellis
Brian Portnoy, of Shaping Wealth, and Jason Klein, of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, probe about
specific situations that reveal the discipline and consistency in a manager’s stated process. Jenny Heller, of
Brandywine Group Advisors, and Mark Baumgartner, of the Institute for Advanced Study, both like to inquire about
past mistakes. Jenny’s inclusion of “epically” piques attention. Charley Ellis asks for three examples to get past the
canned and easy response of just one and implicitly asks about their learning process at a time when it might be
easy to pass up a teachable moment.
e. Team dynamics
“What creates social capital in your organization?” – Kim Lew
“What do you do for fun?” – Margaret Chen
“How do you make decisions?” – Jim Williams
“What types of interpersonal conflicts have arisen and how did you handle them?”
Teams are complex organisms. Learning about their formal interactions and informal norms helps allocators
determine the likely stability and longevity of the enterprise.
Kim Lew, of Columbia Investment Management Company, dives into the culture of an organization by exploring
social norms. She wants to figure out what gets rewarded in the organization. Sometimes working late hours is
considered exemplary, other times it may be helping others, giving feedback, training analysts, or kissing up to the
boss.
Margaret Chen of Cambridge Associates can catch managers off guard towards the end of an interview with a
personal pop-up question that often is met with an unrehearsed answer. Her question is intended to understand
what makes someone tick, how they lead, and how they experience the world. She finds that those who “live, eat,
and breathe investments” are worrisome because of the bubble they form around that passion.
Jim Williams asks a simple question with the intent of following up with at least five “whys”. His follow-ups probe
about consistency across the team, degree of input, resolution of differences, hierarchy of the organization, safety
and diversity of thought, and repeatability of the process. He seeks organizations in which everyone understands
and supports the process.
f. Expectations
“What are the circumstances when your strategy will perform poorly? How do you deal with those
conditions?” – Seth Masters
“If you fail to meet your expectations in five years, what will your post-mortem say?” – Jenny Heller
“How do you define success?” – Tom Lenehan
“What is the capacity of your strategy and what will you commit to do when you reach it?” – Dawn
Fitzpatrick
“How rough a drawdown would you consider normal for the strategy?”
An allocator can improve their quantitative assessment of a fund by comparing their expectation to that of the
manager, ensuring they are on the same page.
g. Competitors
“If you had to invest all your savings with one of your peers, who would it be and why? – Dawn Fitzpatrick
“What do you do better than (name specific competitor)?”

-- 24 of 96 --

Asking questions about the competitive landscape allows allocators to piece together a mosaic of opportunities and
calibrate the relative merits of the manager they are considering.
3. Reference checks
Near the end of a due diligence process, allocators conduct exhaustive reference checks on managers. This final
set of interviews has the intention of confirming beliefs about the people and process, fine-tuning expectations, and
getting a relationship off to a flying start. Checks on public market managers tend to focus on character and
expectations. Private market manager references also probe into the manager’s impact on prior investment
outcomes.
The set-up of reference checks creates a different and trickier dynamic than manager interviews. Reference checks
are typically conducted over the phone with someone the allocator does not know and may not interact with again.
Further, the referee is usually more beholden to the manager than the allocator. Each reference comes with their
own bias and agenda, and allocators must take their expression of support with a grain of salt.
Thorough allocators call names on a reference list despite the likelihood of bias in favor of the manager. I found it
surprising how infrequently references get called, particularly for popular managers where allocators may rely on
the wisdom of crowds. Occasionally, on-list references share that they are not that enthusiastic about the manager.
If the few chosen references are not wildly enthusiastic and that information comes without a rationale as to why,
the allocator may want to take a step back and dig deeper.
The most important question an allocator asks of on-list references may be the one Kip McDaniel of Institutional
Investor asks of every subject: “Who else should I talk to about this?” Getting off-list references can offer less
biased perspectives about the manager and help uncover any potential issues.
Allocators can consider a full 360-degree perspective, inquiring about a manager’s former bosses, peers, and
subordinates. One favorite of mine was speaking to the manager’s former administrative assistant.15 The less-
varnished the reference, the closer the allocator gets to objectivity. I once went as far as to call the ex-girlfriend of
a prospective manager. I can’t say she welcomed the call, but I can tell you her reflections about her ex served as
the final confirmation for our investment thesis that led to a productive investment.
Reference check questions tend to attempt moves like ju-jitsu, positioning the subject to reveal information with
natural momentum. Some good examples include the following:16
Why are you serving as a reference?
If he has a blind spot, what would it be? (Best asked as a follow-up from, “If he has a superpower, what
would it be?”)
What would a naysayer say about him?
Why might a former colleague say x? (where x is an area of concern)
If you were in my shoes, what questions would you ask?
What advice would you give them?
Would you put your parents’/grandparents’ money with her?
Summary
Over the last few years, I regularly re-engaged in my past work investing in managers and advising allocators. On
one occasion, I caught up with an investment manager on behalf of a foundation for whom I serve on the
investment committee. Rather than assume my prior allocator evaluative interviewing style, I naturally began the
meeting as I had grown accustomed to from the podcast. We connected personally, reviewed the investment
program philosophically, and then talked strategy. I listened actively, mirrored, asked why, and explored topics of
interest in the portfolio. To my pleasant surprise, the conversation was richer and revealed more about the
manager than any I had conducted with him previously.
Investment teams interview managers every day. Preparation, setting the stage, listening, and feedback all
contribute to interviewing skill.
Hours upon hours spent interviewing managers leave allocators with a wealth of information to make decisions
about the managers to hire, retain, or replace. The process of making good decisions is tricky, so let’s turn to that
to make sure all these interviews don’t go to waste.
To learn more
Podcasts
The Tim Ferriss Show: The Interview Master: Cal Fussman and the Power of Listening (Ep.145)
Invest Like the Best: The Ace of Spades, with Eric Maddox (Ep.15)
Books
Getting the Love You Want, Harville Hendrix
11. “Q&A: Larry King on asking simple questions and listening closely,” Columbia Journalism Review, July 7, 2017.

-- 25 of 96 --

12. The Tim Ferris Show, “The Interview Master: Cal Fussman and the Power of Listening,” episode 145.
13. Capital Allocators, Episode 8.
14. Harvard Business School case study #693019-PDF-ENG, Toyota Motor Manufacturing, U.S.A., Inc., 1992.
15. This reference check worked best when my administrative assistant conducted the call.
16. I found these examples from answers to a question I posted on Twitter. For this audience, Twitter can be a wonderful crowdsourced
encyclopedia. Follow me @tseides and join in!

-- 26 of 96 --

B
Chapter 2: Decision-Making
“If Danny Kahneman still commits these behavioral errors himself, how is Drew Dickson not going to?”
– Drew Dickson
ack in 2007, a good friend of mine led the due diligence on a European hedge fund run by a former Soros Fund
Management portfolio manager. My friend was the head of research at a large fund of funds and was
incredibly thorough. In fact, his team’s work was so deep that managers referred to their process as a proctology
exam.
My firm had seeded the hedge fund a few years before and after a strong stretch of performance, it crossed $1
billion in assets. I watched my friend and his team gather more information about the fund than anyone else. They
understood everything about the manager and his approach and confirmed every detail along the way. I don’t ever
recall seeing more t-s crossed and i-s dotted.
During the process, he learned that the fund’s returns were volatile. Historically, his firm preferred managers that
delivered a smooth return stream. When we discussed the potential mismatch, he shared that his investment
committee was looking to add more juice to their portfolio.
With all the information available in their hands, the investment committee approved a substantial investment.
Sure enough, the fund hit a rough patch shortly thereafter and within a year, the fund of funds redeemed. I have
wondered what happened that day in the committee meeting ever since.
* * *
All the information gleaned from interviewing and conducting due diligence on managers can go for naught if an
allocator does not follow an effective decision-making process.
And here’s the problem: we are hardwired to make poor decisions.
The field of behavioral economics sheds light on this unfortunate set of conditions. The human brain is designed to
survive in the wild. Generations ago a fight or flight response was the difference between life and death. Daniel
Kahneman referred to this instinct for action as System 1 thinking in his book, Thinking, Fast and Slow.17 Most
decisions we make are based on instinctive reactions. Occasionally, we consciously shift to System 2 thinking in
which we carefully process information.
A CIO seeks to follow a sound process and get as close as possible to discovering the truth with the information
available at the time. It follows the tagline of the Alliance for Decision Education, a non-profit co-founded by Annie
Duke, “what is true and what to do.”18
We’ll start by developing an understanding of why it is so hard to make good decisions and then turn to how to
improve the process.
Why this is so hard
Annie Duke, poker legend and author of Thinking in Bets19 and How to Decide,20 spent 20 years at a petri dish for
decision-making: the poker table. In each hand of poker, she would make moves, obtain real-time feedback, and
have an opportunity to assess her decision process.
Annie’s research in the field helped her understand why people make bad decisions. Decisions are like bets that
arise from beliefs about the way the world works. When a CIO buys a stock or a fund, they are betting on their
belief that the investment is better than the many other options of putting the money to work.
The way humans form beliefs is counterintuitive. One might think that we hear an idea, ponder it, decide if it’s
true, and then form a hypothesis. But that is not how the brain works. Instead, we hear an idea, immediately
decide it is true with our System 1 brain, and maybe later shift to System 2 thinking and vet the idea.
Beliefs, in turn, are based on facts and predictions. Our ability to process facts and make predictions is
compromised. Annie points to confirmation bias, motivated reasoning, and tribe identification as three of the most
pernicious ways the inputs that form our beliefs can be flawed. Confirmation bias is a well-known behavioral flaw
that we notice and emphasize information that confirms our existing point of view. Michael Mauboussin said, “If
you’re in the investing business and you haven’t fallen for confirmation bias, you’re not doing your job.” Motivated
reasoning is confirmation bias on steroids. Investors work incredibly hard to discredit information that is
contradictory to their hypothesis. Lastly, our affiliation with tribes influences our views. As an investor, we might
be a card-carrying member of the value investing tribe, the trend following tribe, or the long-term investor tribe.
We don’t trust information from sources that arise from outside of our tribe.
Just becoming aware of our biases isn’t enough to allay the pattern. We suffer from resulting, self-serving, and
hindsight biases that inhibit our ability to improve our decision-making process. Annie refers to “resulting” as the
inability to separate a good decision from a good outcome when assessing others. When allocators see good
performance from a manager, they think the manager has made good decisions; bad performance must come from
a bad decisions. As Paul Isaac of Arbiter Partners mocks managers, “volatility is only downside deviation. Upside
deviation is called performance.” All investors have a self-serving bias that wants to take credit when good things
happen and defer blame when bad outcomes arise. It takes System 2 thinking to investigate when a bad outcome
came out of a good decision process, and is even harder to recognize when dumb luck caused a good outcome to
arise from a bad process. Hindsight bias gets in the way of accurately assessing past decisions. Investors

-- 27 of 96 --

subconsciously change the facts that led to decisions. Allocators are intelligent and thoughtful, which
unfortunately only serves to strengthen their resolve. The smarter they are, the better they are at rationalizing
existing beliefs, perfecting motivated reasoning, and sticking to opinions.
Investing in managers has less time pressure than a round of poker. While one might think allocators can mitigate
these issues, even decisions without a timeline are biased.
Making good decisions as a team or with a committee compounds the challenge. Group dynamics can impinge
independent thinking and truth discovery, two of the most important prerequisites for making good decisions.
CIOs generally work with teams, so let’s turn to some steps to improve the decision-making process in a group
setting.
Making better decisions
I have good news and bad news to share.
Let’s start with the bad news. We are hardwired to make bad decisions even after we learn all the ways we are
conditioned to muck it up. No matter how many times we read Kahneman’s book, or how many times we listen to
Annie on the podcast, we will still make the same mistakes. Drew Dickson of Albert Bridge Capital is keenly aware
of this fact, cleverly articulated in the quote at the top of the chapter. But his knowledge of it alone won’t change
how he makes decisions.
Take a deep breath.
The good news is this awareness compels us to design systems that help mitigate the problem. We cannot change
how our brain works, but we can think about information in a new way by striving to find an accurate
representation of the truth and recognizing that we will only experience one of many outcomes that might occur.
These two mental models open us to uncertainty, reduce overconfidence, and encourage contrary opinions.
CIOs can focus on two broad areas to improve their decision-making process. First, they can carefully design the
structure of the team. Once this is done, they can add steps to their decision process to increase the probability of
making good decisions.
1. Structure
Setting up the structure of the team lays the groundwork for a sound decision-making process. Teams can be more
effective than individuals in unearthing and calibrating a range of possible outcomes in an investment decision.
Can be is an important caveat, as a group that is constructed or managed poorly will exacerbate behavioral biases.
The size, continuity, and diversity of teams each have a substantial impact on a CIO’s decision-making
effectiveness.
a. Optimal size
Most CIOs oversee small teams internally. Boards can range in size. Michael Mauboussin cites research that the
optimal size of a decision-making unit is four to six people. Annie Duke adds that a team of as little as three can be
highly effective.
b. Continuity
The longer a team stays together, the better a CIO can function as a decision maker. More repetitions allow a team
to develop institutional knowledge and grow confidence in their decision-making process. CIOs that have the
ability and wherewithal to retain key team members, like David Swensen and Scott Malpass, have been some of
the most successful over time.
c. Cognitive diversity
An ideal team has cognitive diversity, benefitting from members who think differently. Cognitively diverse team
members may come from different backgrounds, training, experiences, and personalities. Social diversity (race,
gender, age, ethnicity) may offer a wide range of life experiences and perspectives. Interestingly, social diversity
does not result in cognitive diversity all the time. The key to good decision-making is fostering a team whose
members think differently, not who look different but think the same way.
CIOs walk a thin line between the salutary benefit of different thinkers and the potential challenge of team
cohesion. Cognitive diversity necessarily brings together team members from different tribes, who may
instinctively be biased against each other’s opinions due to differing norms of conduct. Ash Fontana at Zetta
Ventures tries to find people to bring onto the team that are as different as they can possibly manage culturally.
Bridging this gap between diversity and cohesiveness is a challenge. Michael Mauboussin suggests seeking
individuals with a high RQ, or rationality quotient. Rational thinkers are more adept at accepting differences in
order to gain from the benefits of cognitive diversity. Gathering a team of high RQ, cognitively diverse people gets
the ball rolling. The way the group takes shape determines its success.
2. Conduct
Once constructed, the course of conduct significantly influences how teams perform. Sound decision processes
encourage cognitive safety, independence of thought, and behavioral awareness.

-- 28 of 96 --

a. Cognitive safety
Team members need to feel safe in their role to verbalize divergent opinions. Much of this safety comes from the
leader of the team, who sets the tone through their words and actions. Ana Marshall at the William and Flora
Hewlett Foundation opens her team to expressing independent views by reminding them to “argue as if you’re
right, listen as if you’re wrong, and be willing to change your mind.”
The rest of the team consciously and subconsciously pays close attention. Effective leaders invite collaboration,
encourage out-of-the-box thinking, and avoid blaming others for bad outcomes that follow good processes.
b. Independence of thought
The sequence of conversation in a group decision process can significantly alter the outcome. When a leader is
respected or a perceived expert expresses an opinion, the rest of the team’s otherwise independent views get
compromised. If a venture capital specialist weighs in on the outstanding opportunity to invest with a new
manager, other members of the team are more likely to defer to the specialist’s opinion and withhold reservations
they may have.
Effective leaders manage the potential to infect others with their beliefs through their orchestration of meetings.
First, they allow the most junior or least informed team member to go first. Second, they steer the conversation
away from more charismatic extroverts in the group, enabling introverts to have equal participation. Third, they
withhold their view until others in the group have an opportunity to weigh in. Fourth, they communicate in
probabilities to express uncertainty and invite input. Lastly, they use a ballot voting system to avoid social proof
when it comes time to weigh in on a decision.
c. Behavioral awareness
Each team member brings biases to the table. Teams that understand each other’s individual biases are more
effective at getting to the heart of issues without interference.
Kim Lew asks each of her team members to create a list of what gets in their way of objectively looking at
investments. Where are they willing to take excessive risk, or why might they miss out on opportunities they
should pursue? She also asks her team to come up with ideas to help them balance out these biases. Someone who
is overconfident in a certain asset class may need a devil’s advocate. Someone could be risk-averse and need
encouragement in their convictions. When team members become aware of each other’s biases, they can work
together to form better decisions.
Noting other common biases can help CIOs avoid decision-making roadblocks. CIOs combat the natural instinct to
give more credibility within a tribe by separating the quality of an idea from the deliverer of the idea. They can
monitor how team members instinctively handle bad outcomes in an effort to focus on facts and away from
emotions.
3. Thought process
Once the structure and norms of conduct for the team is in place, CIOs can turn to a checklist of considerations to
organize investment decisions. These include thinking probabilistically, incorporating base rates, conducting risk
assessments, checking biases, and eliciting feedback.
a. Think in probabilities
Effective teams speak in probabilities. In Thinking in Bets, Annie Duke recommends the phrase “Wanna bet?” for
occasions when someone states an opinion as a fait accompli. Challenging someone to a bet holds them
accountable in a way that normally does not happen. They instinctively shift from System 1 to System 2 thinking
and compel teammates to move from certainty to uncertainty. Bob Rubin had a rule on his famed risk arbitrage
desk at Goldman Sachs that no one could speak about an investment without framing the discussion with a
probability tree of expected values.21
In How to Decide, Annie recommends a six-step decision process for making important decisions between two
options. For each possibility, create a decision matrix that includes 1) all possible reasonable outcomes, 2) the
payoffs of each, and 3) the probability of each occurring. Following these six steps encourages counterfactual
thinking, where decision-makers broaden their perspective beyond the most probabilistic outcome to consider a
range of possibilities.
b. Base rates
Incorporating base rates, or using the “outside view,” is highly effective in reducing overconfidence.
Most of the time, we make investment decisions based on the “inside view.” We gather information about an
investment opportunity, dive into due diligence, use our experience and judgement, and make an assessment about
the future.
Alternately, the outside view considers a statistical sample of similar past situations. Rather than assign expected
returns and risks to one opportunity, an allocator studies a large group of similar opportunities in the past to put
the decision in perspective.
For example, consider an analyst forecast for Amazon stock. The analyst believes Amazon will grow revenues by
15% per year for the next ten years and creates an amazingly detailed model to describe how Amazon will get

-- 29 of 96 --

there. Amazon has grown faster than that for a long time, so anchoring to recent history makes the model appear
sensible.
However, the base rate for Amazon’s future sales might look at every company since 1950 that has had $100 billion
or more in revenue, adjusted for inflation, and ask how those companies grew in the subsequent ten years. It turns
out there are 313 companies in that sample set and exactly zero of them grew at 15% annually from that large a
revenue base. Only seven grew more than 10% per annum, or 2% of the total in the reference class. It is certainly
possible that Amazon will grow at 15% for the next ten years, but the base rate of 0% might inform the analyst that
their model has a lower probability of hitting the revenue target than they initially projected from their inside view.
Base rates are helpful for allocators both in their own investment decisions and in assessing the decisions of
managers. Allocators tend to put little weight on the outside view of managers, relying instead on their assessment
of individuals in their analysis. Many CIOs are excited about the hedge funds in their portfolio yet are pessimistic
about the average hedge fund return. Incorporating base rates into the research process can prove helpful in
cooling overconfident expectations.
Additionally, allocators can consider managers’ use of base rates in their due diligence. Managers that consider
both the outside view and inside view in their security selection are likely to make better decisions over time.
Those unfamiliar with the concept may have a blind spot.
c. Risk assessments
When the investment case to underwrite a manager is complete, CIOs can take a step back and reconsider what
might go wrong. Pre-mortem analysis, red teams, devil’s advocates, and pro-con lists all help unearth risks the CIO
may not have considered when building their thesis.
1. Pre-mortem analysis
Gary Klein is a cognitive psychologist who studies how professionals become highly skilled at their craft. He
created the pre-mortem analysis to help fighter pilots in the air force. A pre-mortem is a risk management tool that
moves up a post-mortem analysis chronologically to uncover alternative possibilities that may not have been
considered.
An example process for a pre-mortem is shown here.
a. “The plan has failed.”
The CIO kicks off the pre-mortem by telling the team they have looked in a crystal ball and seen that the plan has
failed. Framing the conversation this way, as opposed to asking “What could go wrong?”, changes the mindset to
see a disaster and own it. The counterfactual allows the brain to access thinking and speculation that it would not
otherwise engage.
b. Take a pause
The CIO gives the team a few seconds to sit with this reality. The plan has failed.
c. Write down what happened
Each team member individually takes two minutes to write down all the reasons why the plan has failed. Two
minutes affords them enough time to think, but not so much time that the energy in the room is lost. Writing down
ideas encourages independent thought.
d. Share ideas one at a time, starting with the leader
The leader begins sharing ideas for why the plan has failed. In starting out, the leader purposely infects the group
in taking the exercise seriously. The rest of the team will follow suit.
The leader calls on team members one at a time, requiring each team member to share one potential problem with
the plan. The format encourages introverts to speak out and controls extroverts from dominating the discussion. It
fosters cognitive safety and gives permission for everyone to bring up ideas.
The leader continues to orchestrate a flow around the table until the team has presented all of its ideas.
e. Write down actions to mitigate risk
Seeing everything that can go wrong, the team then takes two more minutes to write down all of the ways they
individually can prevent these outcomes from occurring.
f. Share risk prevention actions
The CIO initiates a round of hearing what can be done to mitigate the risks presented.
g. End meeting
The CIO adjourns the meeting, steps back and thinks about the decision, now armed with an additional array of
information. They can reassess the decision and make a new plan of action using all the material unearthed in the
pre-mortem.
Pre-mortems reduce overconfidence of decisions more than any other technique, foster a culture of candor, and
makes teams smarter.
2. Red teams
Andy Golden utilizes “red teams,” in which a distinct group is tasked with conducting research and poking holes in
the recommendation made by the recommending “blue team.” Red teaming is more time-intensive than a pre-
mortem and requires more resources.

-- 30 of 96 --

Red teams also bring along a host of potential biases. Team leaders again need to ensure independence of thought
and cognitive safety. Importantly, the red team must take ownership of their role. Red and blue team members are
typically part of the same organization, a tribe of its own. The approach loses effectiveness if the red team holds
back on their critique. Red teams are most effective when the individuals come with different areas of expertise
and are not personally invested in the recommendation.
3. Other risk management tools
Devil’s advocate and pro/con lists are other tools that can be used to unearth contrary states of the world. A devil’s
advocate is tasked with poking holes in a thesis. Red teams generally are more effective than devil’s advocates.
The devil’s advocate approach loses the cognitive diversity of the whole group and can get antagonistic. However,
when teams are constrained by resources, devil’s advocates can add a valuable step to the investment process.
Listing out positives and negatives of a decision – a pro/con list – is a reasonable starting point. This is better than
not considering alternatives at all, but Gary Klein’s research discovered that a list of cons is less effective than pre-
mortems in tapping into the creativity of the team.
d. Bias checklist
CIOs can use a checklist at the point of decision to review common biases. Timing and overconfidence are two
examples that tend to afflict investment decisions.
Ostensibly, all investment research concludes that individuals and institutions chase performance. We tend to
invest in managers or buy securities after strong periods of returns and redeem or sell after periods of weakness.
We can create a high-functioning team, consider base rates, conduct pre-mortems, and still make decisions that
chase performance. Separating the decision about investing with a manager from the timing in doing so when
permittable is a helpful trick to mitigate the bias. Getting excited about a manager need not equate to investing
immediately when the enthusiasm takes hold.
CIOs and their teams are rarely more enthusiastic about a manager than the first day they put capital to work.
Their team has put significant time and effort into research and is deeply vested in the new relationship. Optimism
runs high and overconfidence can easily creep into their thinking. We broadly tend to overestimate a manager’s
edge and underestimate the future volatility of a strategy at the moment of decision. Adding a check on position
sizing can help combat this bias. Overconfidence may lead to sizing a position higher than would be warranted,
whereas starting off conservatively allows a more realistic assessment of the future over time. Some investments
offer the opportunity to cut losses as well, which can help prevent mistakes when we become emotionally
unhinged.
e. Feedback loops
We can make very good decisions that do not work out. When I look back at my decision to bet with Warren
Buffett, I still believe it followed a good process and the odds of winning were in my favor.
Alternatively, we can make terrible decisions that do work out. Annie Duke shared that her decision to quit
academia to play poker came from one of the worst decision processes of her life.
Our natural tendency as individuals is to draw the wrong lessons from decisions: bad outcomes are not our fault
and good outcomes come from good processes. Making better decisions requires feedback to evolve and enhance
the investment process. Documenting decisions, creating a decision group, and considering the role of luck are
useful tools to build feedback loops in the decision process.
1. Decision journal
Improving the investment process requires an accurate statement of the facts and beliefs known at the time the
decision gets made. Hindsight bias will cloud our memory of what we knew. A decision journal ensures a CIO can
learn and grow from a review of past decisions.
Part of my conviction in the quality of my decision to bet with Buffett comes from a white paper I wrote at the time
of the bet. I based my assessment of the probability of success on an outside view of the wager – the S&P 500 had
never before outperformed the hedge fund index over a ten-year period. However, I did not conduct a pre-mortem,
which may have unearthed the possibility of markets shifting and lowered my conviction.
Annie had no such process when she moved from the academic world to poker. She looks back and thinks she
barely even made a conscious decision to play poker in the first place. It was the only path that came up and she
just went with it. Hence why she recalls it now as a terrible decision process.
2. Convene a decision group
A CIO can address decision washing by leaning on others in a decision group.
An effective decision group follows the structure and conduct principles above, ensuring open and frank
communication. The group seeks to discover the truth about a decision rather than to determine who was right.
Annie uses the acronym CUDOS to describe the characteristics of a good decision group.
C: Communism – share all the data transparently, especially information that paints a view in a bad light.
U: Universalism – seek the objective truth. Pay attention to the bias to overweight or dismiss facts
depending on who is communicating the message.
D: Disinterested – note our emotional conflicts of interest. Be mindful of motivated reasoning, confirmation
bias, and hindsight bias.

-- 31 of 96 --

OS: Objective Skepticism – approach the world asking why things aren’t true.
3. Role of luck
As the skill of managers increased over time, luck has become more important in outcomes. The dynamic pointed
out by Michael Mauboussin has permeated investing just as it did with Major League Baseball hitters over the last
few decades.
Money managers tend not to see the importance of luck in their success. Among the many managers Brian Portnoy
met, he found that the vast majority would not accept that luck was part of the equation when their returns were
strong. Good performance demonstrated skill, bad performance was bad luck: a textbook example of self-serving
bias.
Allocators need to be patient and gather lots of information to distinguish between a manager’s luck and skill. Tim
Recker at the James Irvine Foundation reminds his team that business cycles can last seven to eight years, and
some managers need a full business cycle to show that their strategy works.
Summary
Making good decisions is hard. We are hardwired to do this poorly, so building processes to mitigate our pernicious
biases can help make our decisions less bad.
Investment ideas are not black and white. Known and unknown risks are a part of every investment, and it is rare
to have an honest consensus on a team. When functioning at a high level, teams unearth many scenarios and
assign probabilities to potential outcomes that provide the full mosaic of information for a CIO to decide.
When a CIO has made the decision to hire a manager, they may find they are a price-taker, needing to accept the
terms offered by a manager in high demand from allocators. Other times, the CIO may be in position to negotiate
terms. The next chapter discusses how to make the most out of those opportunities.
To learn more
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Annie Duke – Improving Decision-Making (Ep.39)
Capital Allocators: Annie Duke – How to Decide (Ep.156)
Capital Allocators: Gary Klein with Paul Johnson and Paul Sonkin – Conducting Pre-Mortem Analysis (Ep.109)
Capital Allocators: Michael Mauboussin – Active Challenges, Rational Decisions and Team Dynamics (Ep.36)
Books
Thinking, Fast and Slow, Daniel Kahneman
Thinking in Bets, Annie Duke
How to Decide, Annie Duke
17. Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, Farrar, Straus, and Girous, 2011.
18. www.alliancefordecisioneducation.org
19. Annie Duke, Thinking in Bets: Making Smarter Decisions When You Don’t Have All the Facts, Portfolio/Penguin, 2018.
20. Annie Duke, How to Decide: Simple Tools for Making Better Choices, Penguin Group, 2020.
21. The desk spawned a legacy of hedge fund titans, including Tom Steyer (Farallon Capital), Richard Perry (Perry Capital), Frank Brosens
(Taconic Capital), Dan Och (Sculptor Management), Eric Mindich (Eton Park Capital), and Eddie Lampert (ESL Investments).

-- 32 of 96 --

C
Chapter 3: Negotiations
“Negotiation is learning.”
– Daylian Cain
IOs are tasked with negotiating issues big and small. They embrace a partnership mentality and enjoy being
on the same side of the table as their managers. After a lengthy discovery and due diligence process to
identify a new manager, they often dread negotiating the terms of the relationship. Many are self-effacing about
their inability to win a negotiation.
When leading their organization, CIOs regularly negotiate compensation, meeting attendees, and everything in
between. As soon as the day is done, CIOs go home and encounter negotiations with family members too.
I got indoctrinated into the world of negotiations at business school. With teaching from Getting Past No22 and
Getting to Yes,23 I learned about reaching an agreement where both sides feel good about the outcome. The theory
involved acronyms like finding a ZOPA (zone of possible agreement), knowing your BATNA (best alternative to
negotiated agreement), and managing emotions by “going to the balcony.” We were told to focus on interests
instead of positions, look for ways to “expand the pie,” and put ourselves in our counterparty’s shoes. I enjoyed
thinking of the many efficient, positive, win-win negotiations in my future.
I proceeded to get steamrolled on every important negotiation I encountered.
Just as recognizing behavioral bias in making decisions is completely different from avoiding it, negotiations in
practice are different from theory. Daylian Cain teaches negotiations in a practical way at Yale University School of
Management and offered some suggestions on the show to improve outcomes in all negotiations.
His lessons can be divided into preparation, updating views, and tricks of the trade.
Preparation
The biggest mistake negotiators make is inadequate preparation. Daylian conducts extensive experiments with his
students. With great consistency, he finds that the most prepared students score the highest, irrespective of their
prowess in the negotiation itself. Proper preparation includes assessing your interests, those of your counterparty,
and contingency planning.
1. Your interests
Organize your thoughts with a planning document that answers the following questions:
What do you want?
Why do you want it?
What are your priorities?
What is your exchange rate?
What and why are straightforward. Planning gets tricky around priorities and exchange rates. Our top priorities
are what we need out of the process; whereas, lower priorities may be sacrificed in order to achieve the most
important goals.
Good planning considers the price of trade-offs, or the exchange rate. We don’t place the same value on each
priority and attaching numbers to outcomes turns implicit choices into explicit ones.
For example, if you are taking a job in a new location and are buying a house, consider the price of commuting.
How much is it worth to add 15 minutes to a daily commute in order to buy more land or a bigger house? It may
seem strange to put in monetary terms, but the house you choose to buy and the price you pay will do exactly that.
We can either plan in advance to consciously price out our interests, or let the process unfold and have choices
priced for us. In the context of investing, a CIO considers explicit trade-offs, like the appropriate fee discount for a
longer-dated share class, and implicit ones, like the value of transparency.
2. Your counterparty’s interests
The next aspect of planning is considering the same questions for your counterparty.
What do they want?
Why do they want it?
What are their priorities?
What is their exchange rate?
Most people don’t learn enough about their counterparty before entering the negotiation. We can figure out our
own interests with a little time and thought, but doing the same for a counterparty requires gathering information
from others. Whether negotiating terms of a partnership or terms of a new job, we can find people who know more
about our counterparty’s needs and wants than we do.
Daylian suggests getting started learning about your counterparty’s interests two weeks before the negotiation to
allow for gathering data and reflecting on interests. Even if it proves challenging to learn specifics, spending time
thinking about a counterparty’s interests readies you to update and revise your views as the process unfolds.

-- 33 of 96 --

3. Contingency planning
Many people enter negotiations preparing to take a victory lap. They understand everything they want, assume
they will get it, and stop there. Their counterparty probably has prepared the exact same way. Actual negotiations
encounter constraints that move both sides away from sweeping every consideration from the other.
Planning for contingencies maps out possible paths the negotiation might take. Think of the negotiation as a game
of chess and consider what moves you want to make if your counterparty moves a pawn, a knight, or the queen.
Working through many possible alternatives provides the most comprehensive approach to planning. The more you
practice what you will say in different scenarios, the more prepared you will be for bumps in the road.
Updating views
Imagine a negotiation you enter with both your preparation sheet and your counterparty’s sheet in hand. You have
perfect information and will leave with everything you want inside the zone of agreement. The useful
characteristics of a good negotiator that otherwise matter, like even-temperament, confidence, and relative
bargaining power, pale in comparison to knowing exactly what your counterparty wants.
Once the negotiation begins, seek to continue learning about your counterparty. View the negotiation as a process
of discovery instead of a battle. As you update your knowledge of their needs, priorities, and exchange rate, you
move through the process guided by relevant facts.
There is only one way to do this: listening. Daylian’s research shows that most people feel the need to talk and
state their case in a negotiation, when listening is by far more effective in gaining an advantage.
Active listening in a negotiation is a variation of the theme for listening while conducting interviews, including
noting, mirroring, validating, and empathising.
1. Noting distractions
Laying the groundwork for a successful negotiation requires calming your emotions. If you want your counterparty
to talk, you need to make them feel safe. Start off grounded and clear-minded to create a space for your
counterparty to feel the same way. Recognize when you get distracted and return to listening intently to pick up
clues that your counterparty shares.
2. Mirroring
Mirroring simply and resisting the temptation to defend your position or solve problems is highly effective.
Responses that help frame a mirror in negotiations include the following:
“Let me make sure I got that …”
“It sounds like …”
When you have finished the mirror, check in with the counterparty by asking “Did I hear you correctly?” or “Did I
get that right?” and allow them to make corrections. Then mirror back those corrections.
3. Validating
Validating is especially tricky in a negotiation when opposing views trigger an emotional response. You may not
agree with what your counterparty has said, but you can still validate their view by putting yourself in their shoes.
Resist the temptation to argue or express your opinion before you validate their stance.
Expressions that help frame validation include the following:
“If you believe x, I can see the logic in what you’re saying.”
“Given that you think y, it makes sense that you would want z.”
“Now that I hear you are saying x, it makes sense you would want z.”
4. Empathizing and being curious
In some situations, expressing emotional empathy can move a sticky process forward. For those who can’t imagine
engaging in this touchy-feely realm, Daylian suggests replacing the notion of empathy with curiosity. Be curious
about what your counterparty wants in your exploration of their interest. With either mindset of empathy or
curiosity, you move away from focusing on differences and set aside counterattacking, talking about yourself, or
disagreeing.
Additional tips
Preparation, updating views, and the language of communication are important prerequisites in the negotiation
process. Daylian also offers a set of seven actionable tips that help along the way.
1. Knowing your worth
Counterparties in a negotiation rarely have equal bargaining power. A CIO may oversee a big pool of capital and
engage with a start-up fund with few suitors. A venture capital firm may have limited capacity and significant

-- 34 of 96 --

excess demand from investors.
The more powerful player often goes after a proportional share of the pie. My business school course in
negotiations taught the theory of expanding the pie, which encourages counterparties to find ways to increase the
size of the pie instead of debating how to carve up a fixed pie.
Daylian teaches the smaller player to identify the unique synergies of the deal and work to split those synergies in
half. Unique synergies are those that can’t be obtained without each other. Importantly, describing the concept of
unique synergies is not what leads larger counterparties to offer more than a proportional share. It is the economic
value of the synergies that does the trick. The smaller player is essential in creating those synergies and need not
accept only a proportional share of the benefits.
2. Non-monetary terms
Money is the driver of business and investment negotiations. It has value to both sides and is a win-lose
proposition. A laser focus on financial considerations can lose sight of non-monetary terms that also have value.
Search for non-financial benefits to bring more value into the discussion.
3. Smart trades
Negotiation inevitably involves give and take. Rather than trying to split every issue down the middle, look for
terms that are big wins for one side and small losses for the other. A series of smart trades can add meaningful
value to both sides.
4. Contingent agreements
Counterparties often have different outlooks of the future. The seller of a business may believe in a faster rate of
organic growth than the buyer does. The buyer may believe its distribution network will expand growth more than
the seller does.
Contingent agreements allow counterparties to resolve differences about the future. Deals to sell a business
frequently have earnouts, where the performance of the business after the closing determines the ultimate price
paid.
5. Going first
Behavioral psychology suggests that making the first offer benefits from anchoring. Daylian believes the research
on the order of operations is inconclusive. If you go first without sufficient information about your counterparty’s
interest, you will wave your finger in thin air and may unknowingly anchor too low. Going first and anchoring high
is effective only when you have learned as much as possible about the zone of agreement.
6. Labelling
At sticky times in a negotiation, using soft language can help keep both sides engaged. In Never Split the
Difference,24 former hostage negotiator Chris Voss discusses the importance of relabeling the word “No.” Turning
a negative into a further exploration can turn a deal breaker into a deal maker. He suggests phrases to move the
ball forward:
“What about this doesn’t work for you?”
“What would you need to make this work?”
7. Walking Away
Walking away from an agreement puts pressure on the counterparty to reconsider their position. At times, walking
away with a graceful path to re-enter the negotiation can be the most valuable tool.
Daylian literally can’t get his students to walk away. He described a negotiations class in which he made walking
away at least once during the semester a requirement to pass the class. Even then, half of his students hadn’t
walked away going into the last negotiation session. He reminded them that they needed to just walk away and
come back. Knowing a passing grade was on the line, they still didn’t do it.
Walking away creates anxiety and risks leaving value behind in the pursuit of more. However, it is a highly
successful tactic to extract just that.
Summary
Negotiations are a necessary part of investing, running an investment organization, and life. Preparing, updating
information, and communicating effectively can enable CIOs to deliver more value for their constituents.
The skills of interviewing, decision-making, and negotiating position a CIO to be able to implement their
investment strategy. Most do not work alone, so understanding how to lead a team is essential to making it all
come together.
To learn more

-- 35 of 96 --

Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Daylian Cain – Master Class in Negotiations (Ep.138)
The Knowledge Project: Chris Voss – The Art of Letting Other People Have Your Way (Ep.27)
Online course
Negotiation Mind Games, Daylian Cain, www.negotiationmindgames.com.
Books
Never Split the Difference, Chris Voss
22. William Ury, Getting Past No: Negotiating in Difficult Situations, Century Business, 1991.
23. Roger Fisher and William Ury, Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In, Penguin Books, 1981.
24. Chris Voss, Never Split the Difference, HarperCollins Publishers, 2016.

-- 36 of 96 --

C
Chapter 4: Leadership
“Successful investors are brilliant, focused, and hard working with tremendous insights that rarely extend
to managing people.”
– Jon Hirtle
IOs have two full-time jobs: managing a pool of capital and managing a team of people. Few CIOs are trained
in leading people as they rise through the ranks. Apprenticeship in the business teaches the skills to grow
financial capital far more than the skills to lead human capital.
I have worked with some great money managers and colleagues, but the only lessons I learned about leadership
and managing others came through osmosis. My colleagues, in turn, had never learned the disciplines either. As a
result, many of my lessons were observations about what not to do.
CIOs have to learn how to lead a team. A few of the guests on the show specialize in leadership and learned their
craft in other disciplines. Michael Lombardi, football coach and commentator, had the benefit of working for Bill
Walsh and Bill Belichick. David “Bull” Gurfein, leadership coach, was a career military veteran ensconced in
leadership training. And Jeff Solomon of Cowen Inc., describes lessons he learned from his time at summer camp:
You end up in a cabin with a bunch of people and you have to make it work. It’s all day, every day, 24-hours
a day. Sometimes that can be super hard, but you’ve got to make it work because you don’t have a choice.
You learn how to fit in with a group, how to play with a group, how to find people you like and manage
around people you don’t. Some days at summer camp, it’s just about getting to the end of the day and
having fun. Those are basic skills at the center of human interaction in groups, and you learn that at places
like summer camp.
The tools these leaders describe offer a common framework in leadership training. Great leaders adopt the
following rules of thumb:
Define a vision
Set standards of conduct
Communicate consistently and frequently
Behave authentically
Inspire and motivate
Adapt and evolve
Define a vision
Successful leadership starts with defining a focused vision for the organization – the “why” in Simon Sinek’s
lexicon.25 Effective leaders create the vision, articulate it repeatedly and passionately, and believe in it deeply.
The vision is a key driver of culture, which we know, feel, and embrace even if it’s elusive to define. It permeates
the company from hiring decisions to investment decisions. A clearly defined mission will attract like-minded
employees and inspire enthusiasm and commitment from them. The leader motivates the team by helping them
believe they are part of something bigger than themselves and their daily work.
Greg Fleming from Rockefeller Capital Management observed business leaders early in his career as a
management consultant and found the most successful ones had a vision that is tight, clear, and communicated
constantly. For example, Bob Iger, the retired CEO of Disney, described his vision for the company when he took
the reins as “create high-quality, branded content, embrace technology, and globalize the business.”26 That vision
became the leading light of the company ever since, informing everything from acquisition strategy to internal
objectives.
Bull Gurfein is a decorated marine veteran. From an early age, he was trained to be a leader with lives on the line.
He defines leadership as “a trust, a bond, a set of principles that cover the basics of formulating plans and
understanding how to give orders.” The vision in the Marines is called the Commander’s Intent. For each mission,
the commander describes the who, what, where, when, why, and how. The Commander’s Intent is the why and
how: why is the mission happening and how should the unit conduct themselves to get it done.
Michael Lombardi delineates the success of sustainable-based leaders over solution-based leaders. Sustainable-
based leaders have a vision that thinks about the long term; whereas, solution-based leaders shift around their
vision to address more immediate issues.
Jen Prosek, the leader of her eponymous public relations firm, calls her team “The Army of Entrepreneurs.” In the
turn of a phrase, she expresses a vision for sustainable leadership.
Patrick O’Shaughnessy created the phrase “Learn, Build, Share, Repeat” to define the vision for O’Shaughnessy
Asset Management. That vision encompasses all aspects of the quantitative research and software platform. Team
members are expected to continuously learn, take a role in building new products or services or enhancing existing
functionality, share those findings with clients and the community, and do that over and over again. It is easy to
imagine a culture of knowledge and practice following that vision.
Jeff Solomon’s motto for Cowen is “Vision, Tenacity, and Empathy.” Those words speak volumes about what
differentiates Cowen from other financial services organizations. Tenacity might be a common Wall Street
stereotype. Vision implies an entrepreneurial mindset that might be different from functionally siloed

-- 37 of 96 --

organizations. Empathy is out of the realm of expectations. The combination of the three is special and has proven
emblematic of a unique culture and character of the people under his watch.
A vision sets the tone for organizations to align. Following and communicating the vision are required to keep it
alive.
Set standards of conduct
John Wooden, UCLA’s legendary basketball coach, famously dedicated the first day of practice every year to
teaching his players how to properly tie their shoes. By meticulously learning the most basic step in getting ready
to play, his players understood that attention to detail in every facet of the game was the standard expected of
them by Coach Wooden.
After establishing a vision, leaders create expectations for how members of the team should behave and perform.
Importantly, a team will follow a leader’s actions more than their words: walking the walk dominates talking the
talk. Coach Wooden made a point in his first practice, but his players would soon forget the lesson if he showed up
every day looking dishevelled with untied shoelaces himself. By practicing what he preached every day, the
impeccably dressed leader reinforced his message.27
Leaders demonstrate the culture through their actions. They determine the pace of activity, degree of intensity,
method of communication, respect of others’ time, and a host of intangibles that permeate the organization.
Michael Lombardi described the habits of Patriots coach Bill Belichick and 49ers coach Bill Walsh in reverent
terms. Belichick has meticulous work habits that are productive and efficient. His schedule to prepare for each
game starts shortly after the prior game ends and is organized down to the hour from early in the morning until
late at night every week during the season. Walsh set clear objectives to be courteous, seek knowledge, and stay
current. His standards of excellence were expected equally from the offensive coordinator to the janitorial staff.
Chatri Sityodtong uses the “warrior spirit” known throughout the mixed martial arts community as the standard of
conduct at ONE Championship. Warrior spirit describes grit, perseverance, and willpower to conquer adversity. In
his business, as in his physical training, he describes mistakes as getting knocked down. No matter what, he
always gets back up. The metaphor flows through to intellectual honesty, which he believes is the bedrock for
continuous learning. Staying humble, admitting mistakes, and learning from the team allows each employee at
ONE Championship to follow the martial arts motto of trying to improve by 1% every day.
Greg Fleming often repeats a quote from Packers great Vince Lombardi that suggests an expectation for his team.
“Perfection is not attainable; but if we chase it, we might just catch excellence.” He doesn’t just talk the talk, as his
executive team relates that he commonly sends emails with new ideas and follow-ups on deliverables before 6 a.m.
Greg also believes in decentralizing decision-making and giving talented people the autonomy to act. He focuses
his time on finding great people, agreeing on a path, and empowering them to run with it.
The Marine Corps has a clearly defined code of conduct that empowers troops. As Bull Gurfein describes, “troops
eat first.” The perspective of the Marine Corps is an inverted pyramid, where the leader is at the bottom trying to
balance everything. Success in the battlefield comes from an 18-year-old rifleman who must locate, close-in, and
defeat the enemy, not the Lieutenant Colonel setting the Commander’s Intent. Leadership is disseminated across
the entire organization. Whether a troop in the field or a cook at the barracks, Marines repeat the phrase “We Are
Marines.” This defines them holistically.
Mission statements adorn the walls of many investment offices around the world. While admirable in intent, most
mission statements turn into empty words. The articulated expression of a code of conduct gets put to the test
when conflicts arise. The degree to which leaders articulate and incorporate “integrity,” “communication” or
“teamwork” in year-end bonuses or hiring decisions will determine whether the mission statement on the wall has
any teeth. Actual norms and standards of conduct follow from decisions made in these moments. Nicely decorated
artwork gets devalued immediately and forever unless hard choices made by leaders are consistent with the stated
mission.
Communicate consistently and frequently
Successful leaders reiterate their vision and live up to their espoused standards of conduct. It is top of mind for
leaders all the time and flows seamlessly in their words and behavior.
Michael Lombardi offers a framework called ROMPS to consider when communicating with a team:
RO: Room – Command the room
M: Message – Command the message
P: Process – Command the process
S: Self – Command yourself
Commanding the room is about presence, including body language, tone of voice, and confidence. Commanding
the message is the ability to explain the plan with one consistent voice across the organization. Each team member
should be able to effortlessly repeat the vision and standards of conduct. Commanding the process involves waking
up every morning committed to the culture. Lastly, commanding yourself entails living up to the standards you set
for others, including self-discipline, education, and growth. These ROMPS nicely bind together the principles of
vision, standards, and communication.
Greg Fleming commonly reminds his team that “it takes a village.” He believes that organizations that are
successful in the long term rely on the entire team to reach their goals. The cliché about raising a child is
consistent with his standard of conduct for empowering the team.

-- 38 of 96 --

Jen Prosek has a gift for creating catchphrases that reinforce the vision for her army of entrepreneurs. She
encourages the team to “Just Ask” for new business. She holds regular team meetings to offer availability and
transparency, including the “J Low Down” when anyone can ask and get answers to any question about the
business. She also articulated her vision in a book, Army of Entrepreneurs, that explores an owner’s mindset and
describes her methods to attract, motivate, train, reward, and retain the members of her team.28
Jeff Solomon reinforces empathy as a unique characteristic of Cowen in his daily demeanor. He has an innate
ability to sit in other people’s shoes and has a warm, welcoming tone of voice. Jeff harkens back to his summer
camp experience and tells his team that when things get tough, which they inevitably will, they can sit down and
say “Hey, we are on the same team and trying to accomplish the same thing. Let’s talk about why we’re arguing
because if we’re arguing because we have different ideas on how to get to a common goal, let’s focus on the
common goal.”
Leaders who communicate effectively do so with authenticity, which in turn allows them to inspire and motivate
their team.
Behave authentically
Self-awareness and humility are essential characteristics of successful leaders. Thomas DeLong, Professor of
Organizational Behavior at Harvard Business School, believes leadership is deeply personal.
Thomas spent eight years side-by-side with John Mack when John led Morgan Stanley. Thomas saw very bright,
technically competent, high-need-for-achievement individuals thirsting for honest conversations. He sought to
develop managers who enable other people to experience themselves more fully and better when in their presence.
That process starts with an exploration of the self, talking to yourself to settle down, quiet the mind, and be
available for others.
The deep honesty Thomas sought goes hand in hand with humility and vulnerability.
When Jen Prosek instructs her army to “Just Ask,” she teaches that the right way to approach a sale is with
humanity. Be humble, straightforward, and bring common sense.
Inspire and motivate
Leaders need to motivate and inspire their team with their words and actions. Their modus operandi will set the
tone for the organization. Great leaders energize their team to achieve more than they realize is possible.
Admired Leadership founder Randall Stutman has coached 12,000 leaders and found a universal frame for leaders
to make people feel special. Team members are all different. Some are motivated by financial rewards and others
by mastery of a subject, belonging, or serving a higher purpose. Trying to motivate each team member according
to their specific needs gets complicated quickly. Instead, great leaders can act like a fan – clapping, cheering, and
rooting for their team and demonstrating they are willing to do anything to help each team member succeed in
good times and bad. The concept of fanness is a consistent, highly effective leadership trait across all of Randall’s
work.29 Each of the following examples are forms of fanness.
Greg Fleming believes in positive motivation and upbeat morale. He points to the importance of optimism,
describing it as true moral courage. When he thinks about inspiring his team, Greg focuses on the particular
strengths of individuals. He takes people who are good and wants to make them feel great and have a sense of
purpose. In order to move the collective organization forward, Greg wants each teammate to feel stimulated and
excited when they get off the elevator each morning.
Jen Prosek also inspires through optimism. She carries herself with a smile on her face and supports her team with
positivity. She recites the phrase from Ella Wheeler Wilcox, “Laugh and the world laughs with you. Weep and you
weep alone,” to remind those around her that the world wants to associate with those who have passion and
energy. She then supports her team by fostering that positive energy, citing phrases like “Let your enemy be your
energy.”
Chatri Sityodtong inspires his team through his own warrior spirit. He repeatedly shares his personal story and
ignites passion through his actions, reinforcing the warrior spirit and acting as a perpetual student.
Jeff Solomon articulates his passion for empathy as his guiding leadership light. As he describes the powerful
force:
You need to understand what motivates the person you’re trying to engage with. You don’t have to agree
with it; you just need to understand it. And the best way to understand how somebody thinks or what
motivates them is to try and imagine what it’s like to be them.
I want to know what you care about most. Why are you doing what you’re doing? When you ask questions
like that from clients, a lot of times you’ll hear answers that you would agree with.
Managing is all about saying, I feel you, and I think I can be helpful. And, by the way, you know, there’s an
economic trade in there too. Can I move the needle for you, and can we move the needle for each other?
Can I lend my brand to enhance your opportunity set? Can we affiliate with one another to get to a better
spot than we were?
I don’t discount the fact that they’re individuals, and they want to succeed on their own. I just want to be
the enabler. If they value enablement, if they value the way that we permission them with tools and
products and services and relationships, they can be better here than anywhere else. But they’re still
individuals who want to win desperately. That is the essence of teamwork.

-- 39 of 96 --

Adapt and evolve
Leaders embrace change. As Michael Lombardi puts it, “If you don’t like change, you’re going to like irrelevance
even less.” The best laid plans can go awry, and even a well-defined vision may need updating and adapting as the
world evolves.
Early warnings of the need to change course can come from feedback loops internally and externally. When Bull
Gurfein steps into an organization to consult management, he asks three questions of every person:
What are we doing right?
What are we doing wrong?
What could we be doing better?
Leaders as sole individuals can miss important trends happening within their organization, with clients, and in the
industry. By getting feedback and doing more of what is going right, cutting out what is going wrong, and
improving on what needs to be done better, leaders can detect necessary changes and set a path to communicating
a change in course when necessary.
When the time comes to make changes, Thomas DeLong suggests starting small. Inertia is a powerful force and
people do not naturally embrace change. By finding small wins and easily digestible movements in a different
direction, the team can begin a process of changing direction behind the leader.
Summary
Leadership entails setting a vision, regularly reminding the team of that vision, taking actions that are aligned with
the vision, and being a fan of team members. Great CIOs are talented both in investing and leadership, crafting
and fostering a vision aligned with their goals.
When a CIO sets a path to follow a vision, they then must ensure the vision is executed by the team. Let’s turn to
some lessons in managing people.
To learn more
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Jennifer Prosek – Branding an Asset Management Firm (Ep.81)
Capital Allocators: Randall Stutman – Admired Leadership (Ep.150)
Online course
Admired Leadership, Randall Stutman and the Admired Leadership team
Randall and his team discuss 100 universal behaviors of admired leaders that they uncovered in their work. It is
the best, most actionable set of tools I have come across. Available at www.admiredleadership.com.
Books
The Ride of a Lifetime, Bob Iger
Army of Entrepreneurs, Jennifer Prosek
It is a folly for me to try to recommend leadership books. Instead, I have shared two that struck me as being true to
the lessons in this chapter.
25. Simon Sinek, Start with Why: How Great Leaders Inspire Everyone to Take Action. Penguin Books, 2009.
26. Robert Iger, The Ride of a Lifetime: Lessons Learned from 15 Years as CEO of the Walt Disney Company, Random House Publishing Group,
2019.
27. John Wooden, Wooden on Leadership, McGraw Hill, 2005.
28. Jennifer Prosek, Army of Entrepreneurs: Creating an Engaged and Empowered Workforce for Exceptional Business Growth, American
Management Association, 2011.
29. The behaviors of leaders expressing fanness are available at: www.admiredleadership.com

-- 40 of 96 --

I
Chapter 5: Management
“Our job is to manage people’s time, give them the ability to be successful, help them prioritize, develop
clear guidelines and plans, and create timelines with milestones and objectives.”
– Bull Gurfein
f leadership is the vision, management is the implementation of the vision. Money managers have a reputation
for being less talented with people than with capital. Managing people takes time away from other activities, so
it is an area that is often overlooked. It requires training and experience commonly left out of investment
organizations.
Managing others requires a CIO to go from being a great individual contributor to overseeing the contributions of
others. The transition requires delegating, giving feedback, and allowing subordinates to make mistakes and learn.
Scott Kupor from Andreessen Horowitz describes the job of a manager as keeping the trains moving, giving people
direction, and answering questions.
Basic management techniques sound like common sense once shared. The processes include the following:
Hiring
Organizational design
Project management
Talent development
Time management
Hiring
In both hiring money managers and executing a strategy, the importance of great people ranks at the top of most
checklists. Chatri Sityodtong says it well in proclaiming, “to unleash your greatness, surround yourself with
greatness.” At the same time, defining what constitutes a great team member differs in each leader’s mind.
Managing people begins with the hiring process. Many recruiting processes lack structure, defaulting to
candidates with the requisite professional skills and a similar personality to the interviewer. Instead, job
interviewing can share a similar process to manager interviews, starting with a strategy for everyone involved to
follow.
The team can prepare probing, open-ended questions that focus on different aspects of a candidate’s character,
and use a scorecard to rank desired traits. A good process considers the candidate’s goals, including financial,
cultural, and developmental, as well as those of the organization.
The interviewing process at WCM Investment Management exemplifies this discipline. Culture is a driving force in
the success of the firm. Paul Black stresses the importance of a great culture internally and a culture aligned with
competitive advantage in their portfolio companies. WCM’s interview process separates the core attributes the
firm believes are required for a candidate to thrive. In each interview, a WCM team member focuses on assessing
one of those characteristics. Together, the series of interviews paints a full picture of the candidate.
Wellington Management is proud of its track record of infrequent hiring mistakes when bringing in talent. Its
collaborative culture and merit-based private ownership model necessitates a working environment where
expectations are high and people care about each other.
Jim Williams focuses on five key areas to explore in job interviews, which he notes are also important topics for
manager interviews:
1. Smart
Problem solving and street smarts. Questions focus on examples of problems they have solved.
2. Communication
Both oral and written. The process includes samples.
3. Team player
Those willing to share what they know. Questions focus on examples of team projects.
4. Integrity
People who take responsibility and make decisions because it is the right thing to do. Questions inquire about
situations where something went wrong.
5. Experience
Relevant experience for the role.
Jim notes these traits are essential to draw out of candidates in advance, because only the last one, experience, will
change over time. He encourages his team to let the interview flow naturally as a conversation where they
eventually cover all of these topics.
After hiring hundreds of portfolio managers and operations professionals over 20 years in the hedge fund business,
Jason Karp of HumanCo categorizes hires in three buckets: dangerous, nuisance, and good.30 His taxonomy is an
insightful framework for hiring.

-- 41 of 96 --

Dangerous hires love following the herd. They are intellectually dishonest and have difficulty admitting mistakes or
changing their mind when the facts change. Dangerous hires fall victim to most behavioral biases, confuse process
with outcome, express overconfidence, rely excessively on gut feel, mix facts and opinions, and fail to learn from
mistakes. The work of dangerous hires lacks detail and focuses too much on the big picture. Culturally, dangerous
hires can be toxic to an organization with cancerous complaining and subverting of others.
Dangerous hires pose a severe risk to a business, especially smaller organizations where each person matters.
Jason suggests looking for signs of issues in their personal life, including a lack of impulse control and discipline.
Nuisance hires are less dangerous, but still pose challenges. These people can be annoying and suffer from poor
communication skills. They tend to blame others when something goes wrong and dwell on failure instead of
success. On the investing front, nuisance hires lack original ideas, have low conviction, and cower in the face of
adversity. Managing nuisance hires requires a lot of time and generates a low return on that time. These people
pose a lower risk to the business, but create large opportunity costs.
Good hires bring positive optionality and are wonderful investments for an organization. These select people are
intellectually honest and willing to change their mind easily when warranted. They are competitive, self-motivated,
overachieving, ambitious, and gritty. As individuals, they have a thirst for self-improvement and introspection, take
true accountability, and engage in a deliberate practice to learn and grow. As a member of a team, good hires
demonstrate high EQ and outstanding interpersonal communication. In their personal lives, they are disciplined
risk-takers and show evidence of willpower. When managers find these good people, they invest the time to
nurture, develop and protect them like family.
Organizational design
From the physical design of office space to the frequency of team meetings, the choices managers make about the
structure of the organization reinforce a firm’s culture. Capital Group, known for its egalitarian, “no star” culture,
goes out of its way to avoid any indicators of status in its office space. Corner offices are only used for conference
rooms.31 All analysts and portfolio managers have offices that are the same size, and if an office is slightly smaller
than the norm, an experienced portfolio manager often will offer to move into it. Some investment firms, like the
Yale Investments Office, have open floor plans to facilitate organic communication. Others, like many value-
oriented managers, create spaces that resemble libraries with quiet, individual offices conducive to reading and
reflection.
The frequency and structure of team meetings sets the tone for communication. Wellington Management holds a
daily morning meeting across the globe where members of the investment team share insights. Most allocator
teams meet less frequently reflecting the slower volume and pace of decisions.
Without proper preparation, team meetings can devolve into a dreaded waste of time. Well-structured meetings
have an agenda, purpose, and action steps along the way. They have a prescribed code of conduct and the
orchestrator of the meeting keeps the team on point.
CIOs regularly step away from the day-to-day structure of their work by organizing offsite meetings. Changing the
setting and regular routine allows the team to think about important strategic topics in a different way.
Project management
With the team and organizational structure in place, managers can turn to getting work done. Tools of project
management include prioritization, articulation of tasks, accountability, and updates.
1. Prioritization – focus of effort
Bull Gurfein learned a concept similar to prioritization when in the Marines. When faced with limited resources,
priority goes to the most important task at hand. In the military, if you face limited artillery, naval gunfire or
airplanes, the resources first go to the unit that is the focus of effort at that time. In investment organizations, the
scarce resource is often a CIO’s time. If the team as a whole understands the focus of effort, individuals can ease
any frustrations that arise when they are sitting outside of that priority for the time being.
2. Articulation – jobs to be done
Jen Prosek defines the roles that her team plays as “Finder, Minder, Binder, Grinder.” A finder identifies
commercial opportunities for the business. Minders are great process managers. Binders work well on
relationships, and grinders get the work done. Members of Jen’s army may navigate multiple roles or may find they
are particularly adept at one. By defining the jobs to be done in this way, Jen manages expectations and
deliverables. New employees at Prosek Partners are indoctrinated with the language during the interview process,
allowing them to be part of the process of determining where they can add the most value.
3. Accountability – assigning tasks
Diffusion of responsibility is a concept that stuck with me from introductory psychology class in college. In the
presence of others, individuals are less likely to take accountability and will assume someone else will get things
done. In the workplace, when tasks are assigned to more than one person, the lack of specific accountability may
hinder the completion of the project. For example, sending emails to multiple people without specifically naming
one to an assignment is a common example of ineffective management.

-- 42 of 96 --

In the Marines, whenever two people are given a task, one person is always the responsible leader. In companies,
however, managers frequently say “Hey everybody, I need you all to get out there and do x.” As Bull Gurfein says,
“When you task everyone, you task no one.”
Entrepreneur Dan Schorr learned to manage people at high-functioning, large consumer marketing brands. When
he ran a thinly staffed start-up with lots of activity, he needed to manage a laundry list of to-dos efficiently and
effectively. Dan used a simple mnemonic of three Ws – Who is doing What and When – to ensure one person was
accountable for the completion of every task.
4. Review – status updates
Bull Gurfein regularly consults businesses that struggle with supervision and support. Managers throw out tasks
and expect them to get completed. When a few weeks go by and the project isn’t finished, managers then engage.
Instead, Bull offers advice on simple ways to better assign tasks to increase the probability of completion. He
suggests developing clear plans, priorities, and timelines with milestones. Companies from start-ups to large
corporations use the lingo KPIs, or key performance indicators, to define the milestones to achieve objectives.
Scott Kupor similarly defines deliverables and asks his team what they think they will need to meet them.
In his book Lean Start-Up,32 Eric Ries discusses a cycle of building, measuring, and getting feedback to iterate on
product development. Patrick O’Shaughnessy uses his vision of learn, build, share, repeat to get at the same idea.
When something goes wrong, good managers perceive problems as learning opportunities. Roz Hewsenian from
Helmsley Charitable Trust asks, “What didn’t I do for you in terms of direction or instruction, or were you not
ready to handle this?” Rather than assigning blame to the team member, she focuses on what she could do better
as a manager.
Talent development
No formal training exists for ascending the ranks as an allocator. The CFA charter may teach the fundamental
principles of investing and allocation, but the art of investing comes from apprenticeship. The Yale Investments
Office has been prolific at churning out future endowment CIOs. Having sat in that classroom for five years, I can
assert that the incredible education and training we received was entirely by osmosis.
Professional services firms frequently fall prey to the Peter Principle in their advancement of strong performers.
The Peter Principle describes the tendency of most hierarchical organizations to promote employees until they land
in a role in which they are not competent to succeed. Greg Fleming saw this on Wall Street, where producers get
moved into management positions and lack the tools to manage effectively. The skill set of great leaders is often
very different from that of high-performing producers. Managers can navigate around the Peter Principle by
incorporating training for those promoted into roles that require a new skill set or by altering their promotion
criteria to consider the skill sets required to succeed.
Roz Hewsenian tries not to impose her views, allowing her team space to be creative. She ensures a thorough due
diligence process is followed and pays close attention to developing skills. When Roz joins her team at a manager’s
office, she focuses on her teammates more than the manager. She studies their preparation, the questions they
ask, and their responses to the manager’s answers. She forms research groups within the team that include a
sponsor, a skeptic, and a senior team member to get three sets of informed eyes on every opportunity. This
approach allows her to have confidence in the breadth and depth of their work and only step in if she sees a gaping
hole in the analysis.
Jen Prosek promotes “Commission for Life” as a mechanism to align the motivation, compensation, and
development of her employees. If a team member brings a relationship to the firm that becomes a client, they
receive 10% of that client revenue for the life of the client and the life of their employment. By giving a commission
for life, she also teaches her army of entrepreneurs how the business operates. If they don’t get paid one month,
they will notice and may learn about accounts receivable and collections. If pricing changes, they may ask why
their commission went up or down. Jen found a compensation scheme that works wonders for her partnership.
Regular feedback is imperative to developing talent. Whether through scheduled 360 reviews or a periodic check-
in on objectives, great managers find ways to offer constructive feedback and set goals for development. Allocators
often struggle to identify metrics to attach to development, as their profession lacks incremental targets like sales
or margins that drive the bottom-line. Nevertheless, creating specific, accountable metrics that tie to impact on the
portfolio gives investment leaders a structure through which to regularly review and develop team members.
CIOs themselves also need to develop and learn. Randall Stutman and his team have worked with the heads of
many investment organizations to coach effective management and leadership. It can be lonely at the top, so CIOs
who engage with peers and coaches stand the best chance of continuing to develop themselves.
Time management
Hiring and developing talent, structuring a team, managing people, and overseeing a portfolio take a tremendous
amount of time. In larger organizations, human resources is its own department, dedicated managers lead teams,
marketing crafts and tells stories, and operators produce the product. In an institutional pool of capital, the CIO
takes on all these roles. A few time management tips may be helpful in figuring out how to get it all done.
Bull Gurfein reminds of the importance of pushing down tasks so that subordinate leaders develop problem-solving
skills and resiliency. Leaders too frequently have the desire to save the day. In doing so, they detract from the

-- 43 of 96 --

responsibility of oversight. Bull resists the urge to do things himself and instead asks his team, “Can you figure it
out? Tell me what you’re going to do to solve it.”
Jen Prosek repeats the phrase “Solve, Don’t Dwell.” She urges her team to put all their energy into solving
problems and not stewing when things go wrong. We all have good luck and bad luck moments. Those who shoot
the moon recognize good luck and focus on maximizing it without distraction. They also take bad luck moments
and find ways to turn them into good luck moments.
Greg Fleming starts his days by thinking about what really matters and what doesn’t. He triages what is really
important that he has to do to move forward, what great people he has in place to perform where he doesn’t need
to get involved, and what pieces fall in between.
Chatri Sityodtong creates a four-box matrix across the axis of priority and urgency. Every day, he starts with high-
priority, high-urgency tasks, pushes out low-priority, low-urgency, and balances the other two.
Summary
Managing a team of people is an essential, full-time job that ensures that a leader executes on their vision. The
tools shared by guests are simple, effective management concepts. Hiring, organizational design, project
management, talent development and time management all go into the process of ensuring that the CIO’s vision
gets implemented.
Thus far, we have covered functional tools employed by CIOs in their role. Now, let’s turn to how modern allocators
think about and conduct their investment process in Part 2.
To learn more
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: David “Bull” Gurfein – Interdisciplinary Lessons from the Marines (Ep.10)
Books
How to Win Friends and Influence People, Dale Carnegie
Take your pick. There are libraries full of management books. I picked this one because it had the most influence
on me.
30. Jason H, Karp on Twitter (@humankarp).
31. Charley Ellis, Capital: The Story of Long-Term Excellence, Managing People, pp. 218–219.
32. Eric Ries, The Lean Start-Up, How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create Radically Successful Businesses, Currency
New York, 2011.

-- 44 of 96 --

Part 2: Investment Frameworks

-- 45 of 96 --

Alongside the tools in the toolkit, guests on the show talk in detail about their investing. Part 2 discusses the
frameworks modern CIOs employ in managing the money entrusted to them. The sequence from high level to the
ground is as follows:
Governance
Investment strategy
Investment process
Technological innovation
The section closes with a case study on how CIOs handled the uncertainty presented by the Covid-19 pandemic in
2020.

-- 46 of 96 --

A
Chapter 6: Governance
“You can’t have investment success with a bad governance structure.”
– Karl Scheer
few years ago, a money manager I knew was preparing for its sixth meeting with a major endowment. They
had met junior analysts, asset class specialists, and senior staff at the endowment’s office and their office, and
they had spent a full day visiting portfolio companies together. In this meeting, they were presenting to the CIO for
the first time in what they thought would be the final hurdle to begin a valuable relationship. The meeting went
well, and the CIO informed them he would make a recommendation to invest at the next board meeting.
A month later, the CIO called the manager to share that the board turned down the recommendation.
That manager was not alone. I sat down with a former CIO of this endowment, which had a reputation for a
challenging governance structure. I wasn’t sure what that meant, so I asked him what percentage of investment
recommendations he brought to the committee were turned down. I was taken aback when he responded, “I’d say
60%.” He was at his wit’s end. Even when he thought he had buy-in ahead of a meeting, the discussion went awry
when egos and infighting among board members took hold.
* * *
CIOs are perceived as sitting at the apex of the food chain of capital. But that is not the whole story.
A consistent theme across all the CIO conversations on the show is the importance of effective governance. CIOs
cannot make decisions as if they were autocratic rulers. They too have a client to serve who is the ultimate owner
of the capital.
Among different asset owners, family offices may be the simplest to understand. The owners of the capital are
family members. The CIO’s role is to figure out their objectives and manage the capital accordingly. Easy to
explain, but with the complex dynamics of families, among the hardest to implement.
Public pension fund CIOs notoriously manage around bureaucracy. Chris Ailman of CalSTRS has spent 30 years at
the helm of public pension funds, despite starting with the premise that “it doesn’t take a Harvard grad to figure
out that the government running an investment organization is a flawed business model.” For Chris to hire an
investment manager, his team needs to send out the same government-mandated RFP (Request for Proposal) that
the public works staff uses to hire a contractor to oversee construction of a highway.
Endowments have investment committees that report to the trustees of the academic institution. Its members often
are knowledgeable and aligned in purpose. Foundations may have a similar set up. Sovereign wealth funds are
government-owned pools created to serve their citizens for the long term. While the long duration of capital and
consistency of mission is helpful, the potential issues for geopolitical concern and conflict are not.
CIOs and their investment teams do the day-to-day work in setting the agenda and implementing the strategy.
When they make recommendations about investment policy, strategy, and manager selection, the board determines
whether those recommendations are approved and executed.
The governance structure overseeing these pools of capital has the potential to make or break all the work
conducted by CIOs and their teams. Sound governance includes a clear delineation of responsibilities, a highly
functioning committee, and incentives aligned with objectives. At the root of all of these is effective communication
between the people involved.
Roles and responsibilities
Ben Meng became CIO at CalPERS in January 2019. The $400 billion California pension fund began operations in
1932 to fund and pay pensions to state workers. Over the ensuing 88 years, it has grown to be the largest defined
benefit fund in the U.S. and one of the largest pension funds in the world. As CIO, Ben sat at the table at the very
top of the global food chain of capital.
Eighteen months later, he resigned. His departure seemed to involve pressure raining down about his potential ties
to China, personal ownership of $70,000 of stock in Blackstone Group, and his decision to remove a market hedge
in early 2020.33
You might assume that a nearly century-old institution with such an important mission would have clear rules in
place about political connections, conflicts-of-interest, and short-term investment decisions. But in response to
Meng’s departure, the CalPERS Board “revealed cracks in philosophy of what power to give staff and what to
keep.”34 For what it’s worth, Meng wasn’t alone. The pension fund’s COO and CFO had exited the revolving door of
leadership in the last two years as well.
Meng’s counterpart in Southern California at CalSTRS, Chris Ailman, says the key with governance is a clear
definition of roles and responsibilities. It sounds so simple. Figure out who is doing what and execute. The board
and the CIO together decide who is accountable for each step of the investment process and decide who has the
authority to make investment decisions.
And yet it is anything but simple.
New CIOs step into their role with a legacy structure that may have contributed to the opening they are brought in
to fill. Meredith Jenkins became the first CIO of Trinity Wall Street following the Church’s sale of billions of dollars

-- 47 of 96 --

of real estate in 2016. She anticipated walking into the seat with a pile of cash to invest over time, but soon found
out that the Church had hired an interim consultant who had rapidly deployed most of the money. It took Meredith
a few years to build the portfolio into the design she had in mind before signing on.
When Ellen Ellison got recruited to be CIO of University of Illinois-Urbana, she took over from a small team in the
foundation’s offices who had outsourced the investments. She had to deconstruct the ship while it was still in
motion. Ellen created a list of 15 agenda items and started with the most difficult one. For six months, she worked
on governance and did not touch the portfolio. This included shrinking the size of the investment committee in half,
writing new policies for investments, short-term funding, conflict of interests, voting bylaws, and eventually, asset
allocation. Only after that groundwork was in place did she turn to reconstructing the investment team and
portfolio.
Once a CIO has their bearings, they will find that their authority to make investments can range from full
responsibility to none. For Matt Whineray at the New Zealand Super Fund, ownership over all investment
decisions is the most fundamental belief. His team makes investment decisions without any required approvals
from the board. The Fund’s performance is at the top of its peers, in part because of this clear delegation and
accountability.
Highly functioning governance processes have a clear delineation of responsibilities. In some organizations like
Matt’s, the CIO may own the entire asset allocation and manager selection process. At the Getty Trust, the
investment office looks to the board to approve the policy portfolio while retaining authority on manager decisions.
Jim Williams can move quickly and provide certainty of crossing the finish line with managers. In others, a CIO
may retain decisions about manager selection or decisions below a certain size commitment. Lastly, at Helmsley
Trust and Carnegie Corporation, the committees retain ultimate authority for all decisions, and yet after thorough
discussion almost always defer to the recommendations of the investment office.
In less effective processes the decision-making unit struggles to act consistently. In family offices, the governance
process may never get defined. Ron Biscardi of iConnections worked with wealthy families and found that the
families struggle with making decisions. Investment issues often are only fourth or fifth on the list of things they
spend time talking to each other about. CIOs have a hard time making timely decisions when the thought of
investments slips down the agenda of any meeting with the family.
Institutions with more independence and abundant resources tend to rely on internal staff, while those more
resource-constrained or with public-facing constituents work with consultants to help navigate governance
challenges. Boards lean on consultants as an independent voice with expertise in overseeing effective decision-
making. Chris Brockmeyer regularly works with consultants for his clients at the Broadway League. He emphasizes
that consultants need to have the trust of all board members to get anything done. Productive consultants sense
hot buttons, toe a middle line, and know when to push for new ideas without getting shot down.
Over the last 20 years, many small and mid-sized organizations elected to outsource the entire investment process.
OCIO firms, typically founded by a former CIO, bring the benefits of professionalized management, resources and
scale that small and mid-sized pools of capital cannot access on their own. OCIOs replace the institution’s internal
CIO, setting investment policy and strategy, conducting the investment process, reporting to the governance board,
and simplifying the complexities of managing assets in a non-investment organization.
Ultimately, the governance board needs to determine how investment decisions get made and who is responsible
for them. Then they need to act accordingly, which is where the investment committee itself can get in the way.
Investment committee
“The governance structure is the Achilles heel of this industry. Some of the biggest mistakes we’ve seen
have been when the board panics at the wrong time.”
– Meredith Jenkins
Chris Brockmeyer spends his professional life in the boardroom. As the Director of Employee Benefit Funds for the
Broadway League, the national trade association for the Broadway theatre industry, Chris serves as an employer-
appointed trustee on 11 multi-employer pension funds, seven health funds and four annuity funds, working with 13
boards and four consultants on $7 billion in total assets. Chris prepares for and runs an investment committee
meeting every week. He works alongside consultants with everyone from union representatives to owners. Chris
described one particularly challenging situation:
We had a consultant that we had asked to do a private equity search. It took us nearly six months for them
to actually start that education process even after we had asked. For some reason, there was resistance,
maybe because they weren’t experts in the asset class themselves. So once we finally got to the point where
we had gotten the education, the RFP process, and the discussions that went on between the consultants,
the Union trustees and the employer trustees created an environment where one side wasn’t trusting the
other side. It might have been that each side felt that the consultant was treating the other side special, so
it created something of a toxic environment where the advice that was being given by the consultant was
not fully trusted by one or both sides of trustees. Once you get to that point, it’s just not possible for a
consultant to be effective in giving advice. And so we replaced the consultant and started over.
For each investment committee, the composition of the board, conduct during the meeting, and communication
between meetings create the dynamics that determine the quality of decision-making.
1. Composition

-- 48 of 96 --

The composition of a board is impacted by its chair, size, background of members, and motivation. Steve Galbraith
from Kindred Capital believes a CIO needs unbelievable support from the committee chair to be effective. Perhaps
none has experienced that more than Scott Malpass. In Scott’s 30 years at Notre Dame, he worked with only two
investment committee chairs. That continuity allowed Scott the luxury of a deep understanding of the process,
familiarity, and efficient dialogue.
Even with a strong committee chair, the size of boards can get unruly. Steve Galbraith serves on boards of a
university, a large family office, a public company, a government agency, and two early-stage fintech companies. He
found that large committees suffer from a deferral of responsibility and lack a sense of ownership in getting things
done. Michael Mauboussin reflected research in Chapter 4, “Decision-Making,” that the optimal size of boards is
four to six people. When Ellen Ellison reduced the size of her committee in half, it shrunk from 18 to nine and was
well on its way to an efficient structure.
The knowledge and experience of board members can fall all over the map. In leading endowments and
foundations, the investment committee is composed of sophisticated investment professionals hand-picked by the
president of the university or foundation in consultation with the CIO. In others, the board members are teachers
and elected officials. Chris Ailman’s work requires continuously educating his board, because its members start
without sophisticated investment knowledge and turn over regularly with election cycles. Chris Brockmeyer does
not work with a single trustee on his 11 boards whose primary job function is investing.
When committees are comprised of investment experts, board members can bring their experience, put the
mission of the organization first, and add significant value.
But some board members with investment know-how have ulterior motives for their service. As Steve Galbraith
relates, “You’d like to think we’re all Mother Theresa and doing things for great reasons. But victory has a
thousand fathers and defeat is an orphan.” Professional investors with healthy egos may impart their views of how
the world works forcefully, as occurred in the university investment office that rejected 60% of the investment
team’s recommendations. Others may be significant donors to the institution with an agenda. Jim Dunn of Verger
Capital offered an example of a board member and donor who was also the CEO of a publicly traded company: “If
the CEO gave us a million dollars and we give that money to an activist manager who wants the CEO fired, that’s a
bad day for me.”
Building a productive relationship with the board requires a CIO to work with what they have, establish guidelines
for conduct, communicate frequently, and influence decisions about new board members over time.
2. Conduct
When a group of individuals with different experience and motivations come together, navigating the decision-
making process is challenging. One of the most important steps a CIO takes is setting expectations for the
preparation and conduct of board members upon their arrival to the committee. Charley Ellis sat on Yale’s
Investment Committee for 16 years and served as the chair for ten. Charley contends that the highly functioning
board was not by accident.
The investment committee is very carefully chosen to be people who, number one, play well with others.
They listen well for an understanding of the other person’s point of view. The second thing is the depth of
homework required. When I was on that committee, I had to set aside an entire day – from eight in the
morning until eight at night – studying the documents so that I would be adequately prepared. That’s a very
unusual characteristic. And then, once a year we had a soup-to-nuts, tear-it-all-apart, look-at-every-single-
assumption, does it all really make sense exactly the way it is? Or should we make some minor or mid-sized,
or even large changes? That day turned out to be enormously productive. We almost always made no basic
changes, but we reaffirmed the strategy, the policies, and the practices that day and understood that was
the only day we discussed it.
Few committees have the expectation and commitment of Yale’s. Quite the contrary in fact. In his decades of
working with clients at AllianceBernstein, Seth Masters found that most boards miss the forest through the trees.
Most boards end up spending surprisingly little time on the issue of what they are there to achieve and
spend a ton of time on little buckets, benchmarks for each of them, and the ones that are doing a little bit
worse than benchmarks. It’s sort of like someone deciding that they’re going to check every newspaper in
the world for grammatical and typographical errors instead of understanding whether or not there’s fake
news.
Managing through the intricacies of the boardroom is an exercise in psychology and human behavior. Chris Ailman
describes it as working for a chorus of 12, in which you work with them individually, but you have to listen to the
chorus. You can’t listen to 12 solos because you are not going to meet their needs. Chris Brockmeyer described the
set of skills he draws upon from his prior experience as a labor negotiator: listening, understanding, putting your
feet in the shoes of the other side, articulating your difference, and trying to convince the other side that your view
is better.
Board struggles come to a head at a key moment in the investment cycle: the inevitable troughs. When human
nature takes over, bad decisions happen. Chris Brockmeyer has seen it play out time and again.
We sell low and buy high. Trustees can get impatient and end up in the trap that so many investors do,
firing a manager at their nadir and hiring someone new at their apex.
At the end of the day, CIOs enlist the board in staying the course. That’s where communication in between
meetings comes into play.
3. Communication

-- 49 of 96 --

Larry Kochard, now at Makena Capital, was a finance professor at University of Virginia in between the start of his
career on Wall Street and serving on the board of Virginia Retirement System and as CIO of Georgetown
University and UVIMCO. In his career as an allocator, he never let go of teaching. Larry believes that constantly
educating the board is one of the underappreciated aspects of the CIO role. Those who embrace educating, as
opposed to viewing it as a waste of time, create more stability for the organization and the investment process.
CIOs regularly reach out to board members before setting foot in the boardroom. By keeping board members
apprised of investment activities, tapping into their relationships and knowledge, and teasing out any issues they
may have, CIOs gather information before getting surprised in the boardroom. Tom Lenehan from the Wallace
Foundation frames it as a process of building trust and generating goodwill with the committee for the times when
you really need it by keeping them informed and asking for advice. The process occurs every day, in every meeting,
and with every decision.
Different organizations find different approaches most effective in communicating. Sam Sicilia at Hostplus had to
learn what recommendations to bring to the board, which not to, and when to engage the board in the process.
Karl Scheer at University of Cincinnati found that transparent communication was very important, but he had to
balance transparency against accidentally giving away discretion.
Consistent, repeated education between meetings with board members follows the same principle as a leader
communicating a vision. By reiterating aspects of the investment philosophy, strategy, and conduct, a CIO improves
the quality of meetings and the chances that the board will stay the course in tough times.
Incentives
Jack Meyer stewarded Harvard Management Company from 1990 to 2005, growing the largest endowment in the
U.S. from $4.8 billion to $25 billion.35 During his tenure, Harvard managed most of the money internally, and
portfolio managers earned incentives tied to multi-year outperformance. The better the results, the higher the
compensation. Harvard’s team of money managers accepted significant discounts to comparable roles elsewhere
to work for the university. Performance thrived.
But the model lacked the political capital to sustain itself. Year after year, alumnae from the class of 1964 publicly
pressured university officials to make investment staff compensation in line with higher education practices.36
Eventually, Jack and his portfolio managers had enough scrutiny and left. Jon Jacobson founded Highfields Capital,
Phill Gross founded Adage Capital, and Jack Meyer founded Convexity Capital. Each received substantial
allocations from the endowment that paid them more than what they would have made internally. Harvard’s
investment program has been in flux ever since.
Investment managers, CIOs, and board members are driven by incentives. Allocators seek alignment with
managers, rewarding them for outstanding long-term performance and avoiding situations where they get rich just
for showing up.
The structure of CIO compensation leaves a lot to be desired. Despite the attention paid to fees at the manager
level, CIOs often do not have economic incentives aligned with their mission. Many family offices pay CIOs a fixed
salary and task them to compete with limited financial resources. Public pension funds pay executives steering
billions of dollars a government wage.
Changing incentives with these pools of capital is an uphill battle. Ash Williams from the Florida State Board of
Administration likens fixing the compensation in the public sector to creating peace in the Middle East. He
managed to pull it off in the state of Florida, after six years and between 15 and 20 public meetings working
through their advisory council. In the end, it was worth the hassle and a life changer for the state’s pension fund.
Endowments and foundations have their own set of compensation issues. The first is political. Donors and
professors balk at seeing large compensation paid to investment leaders, as prominently displayed at Harvard.
Ashby Monk of Stanford observes that football coaches can make $7 million a year in this country, but paying the
same to a CIO is sacrilege.
The second is duration, where the tenure of a CIO is shorter than the duration of the pool of capital they manage.
Kip McDaniel from Institutional Investor finds that a lot of allocators say they are long-term investors, but their
staff compensation is all short term. Even when a CIO has long-term incentives, the measurement period is rarely
longer than three years for a pool of capital intended to serve multiple generations of scholars and grant
recipients.
The third is comparison, where many CIOs are paid relative to the performance of their peers. Peer compensation
is a pernicious practice in the endowment and foundation world. Some CIOs are grouped in peers and
compensated relative to a small group of similar-sized institutions, ignoring the unique needs of each institution.
The misalignment can lead to perverse behavior. I recall a credit manager sharing that an endowment invested
with the caveat that the manager could not accept capital from a list of eight other endowments. By reacting to
their incentive, the CIO turned potential collaborators into competitors.
Incentive structures evolve and improve over time. Canadian pension plans are on the right track, designing
compensation schemes that reward stability and long-term results. Mario Therrien at CDPQ used the analogy of a
hockey player, suggesting he would rather sign a long-term contract with more assurance to get paid over many
years than make a lot of money for four years and risk an early end to his career. The Canadian plans have become
a model for the future, with less staff turnover and outstanding performance.
Summary

-- 50 of 96 --

Effective governance may be the most important and least understood driver of investment results for institutions.
Clearly delineating roles and responsibilities of the board and investment team, setting up and managing an
investment committee, and properly aligning incentives are key attributes of successful governance.
Once the governance structure is in place, CIOs turn to the role they are most known for day-to-day – investing the
capital. That process starts with how they view the world. Their investment strategy is the subject of the next
chapter.
To learn more
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Steve Galbraith – In the Boardroom (Ep.48)
White Papers
Best Governance Practices for Investment Committees, Greenwich Roundtable37
Principles of Investment Stewardship for Nonprofit Organizations, Commonfund Institute38
33. The timing of the removal of the hedge just before the Covid-19 crisis in March 2020 looked horrible. Six months later with the market fully
recovered, Meng’s rationale of the undue cost of a hedge over the long term would have sounded a lot better.
34. “CalPERS board wrestling with how to delegate,” Pensions & Investments, September 21, 2020.
35. “Former Harvard Money White Jack Meyer Tried to Regain His Edge,” Wall Street Journal, April 19, 2017.
36. “Harvard Money Managers’ Pay Criticized,” New York Times, June 4, 2004.
37. Available at: greenwichroundtable.org/system/files/GR-BP-Governance.pdf
38. Available at: info.commonfund.org/investment-management-for-nonprofit-investors

-- 51 of 96 --

T
Chapter 7: Investment Strategy
“To be a good investor, you don’t need to have a particular style to your investing, but you do need to have a
strong view of what you are doing.”
– Ben Inker
he cottage industry of professional institutional allocation with a CIO at the helm is relatively new. When I was
an analyst at the Yale endowment in the early 1990s, I may have been the only such person in an allocation
role in the entire country. The CIOs on the podcast come from widely diverse professional backgrounds. It is no
surprise that this first generation of CIOs have learned the trade on their own. David Swensen’s Pioneering
Portfolio Management is the seminal bible in the field, but reading a book does not compare to lived experience.
CIOs frame their investment activities by articulating a set of beliefs about how the investment world works.
Everything that follows is geared towards implementing a disciplined strategy based on those beliefs.
The heart of an investment strategy beats around the purpose for the capital. It influences the investment time
horizon, preferences of stakeholders, policy portfolio, and structure of the investment effort.
Purpose
Endowments are tasked with managing intergenerational equity, balancing spending today with preserving the
purchasing power of assets for future generations of scholars. Andy Golden refers to his horizon as BLT, or beyond
the long term. He strives to not just produce the best possible results over the next 10 years, but also to make sure
that at the end of those 10 years, Princeton has a program with unfair advantages for the subsequent 10 years.
Their extremely long duration with annual spending along the way leads to an equity orientation and
diversification.
Foundations and hospitals have specific missions in their charter. Foundations are established to give back to the
world in ways that matter to the original donor. Hospital assets are managed to help those in need. Many are
designed to be around for the long term. Other foundations, like Chuck Feeney’s Atlantic Philanthropies, are
designed to give away all the money in the founder’s lifetime.39
Australian superannuation funds serve the retirement needs of a young population. At Hostplus, Sam Sicilia
oversees a pool of capital that will have inflows for decades before a single Aussie dollar trickles out. His
investment philosophy focuses on growing the capital without concern for interim liquidity needs.
Corporate and public pension funds seek to meet the needs of retirees. Their fixed liability streams with finite
duration leads to matching liabilities with fixed income assets.
Individuals define their own purpose for the capital they have accumulated. When it comes to investing, Josh
Brown of Ritholtz Wealth Management believes that less is more. People who come wanting the bells and whistles
of an institutional portfolio within the first conversation get weeded out as prospects. He believes it is for their own
benefit.
Time horizon
Institutional pools of capital have a long duration that will outlast any CIO. Career risk is one of the largest
motivators in investment decisions, and yet across the board, CIOs express that patience is essential to success.
For Mario Therrien, patience comes with a need for a steady hand in difficult times. He refers to the definition of
long-term investing as underperforming for longer than others. Sportswriter Ben Reiter shares a similar lesson
when reflecting on the Houston Astros World Series championship in 2017. One of the things that set the Astros
apart was patience. They had a stomach for the embarrassment and torture that they went through for years in the
basement of the league, and the confidence not to deviate from the plan.40
Investors tend to shorten theoretically longer time horizons. While Andy Golden espouses a multi-decade view, he
also believes the real time horizon is how long a CIO can go with a large amount of discomfort without changing
their path inappropriately. Bill Spitz at Diversified Trust believes that horizon is three years. He finds trustees get
antsy after one year of bad results, get really antsy and begin to pull the trigger after two, and take another year to
actually do it. Sam Sicilia took a pause at deploying capital at the onset of the pandemic in 2020 when the
Australian government blindsided the superannuation industry by offering the population an unanticipated
withdrawal right.
Natural habitat
CIOs grow up in the business developing beliefs about how to achieve investment success. David Swensen holds a
PhD in economics and anchors his investment philosophy in academic research. Yale has long preferred managers
with an equity bias, value orientation, small cap bias, and concentrated portfolio. His protégés learned the trade
under his watch, and generally share the same beliefs after observing and contributing to Yale’s success.
Ana Marshall grew up outside of the U.S. and started her career immersed in high yield and emerging market debt
research. She has a proclivity towards international markets and stresses downside protection.

-- 52 of 96 --

Overseers of capital increasingly incorporate a holistic integration of beliefs. Historically, governing bodies tasked
CIOs with an almost exclusive focus on maximizing investment returns at a given level of risk. More recently, CIOs
consider the broad mission of their organization in their investment decisions.
The movement towards sustainable investing by including environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors in
the investment analysis is a pronounced change in asset management. CIOs may exclude assets that harm the
environment, integrate ESG considerations as a lens in decisions, invest thematically in trends that benefit from
the movement, or make impact investments intended to address sustainability directly. While overseeing the
largest pension fund in the world, Japan’s Government Pension Investment Fund (GPIF), Hiro Mizuno realized that
its $1.5 trillion in assets is so large that the fund necessarily owns the global portfolio. Rather than focusing his
team’s efforts on achieving incremental returns above a benchmark, he focused on improving the returns for the
global portfolio. Hiro believes that investing in sustainable assets, companies, and markets will promote GPIF’s
longevity, and he took a series of measures to encourage the entire ecosystem of capital to emphasize ESG in their
work.
Policy portfolio
Historically, institutions employed a top-down assessment of asset class characteristics and targets to create policy
portfolios. Through quantitative analysis and informed judgement of market conditions, CIOs selected a strategic
asset allocation best positioned to meet their objectives. These targets were a significant driver of investment
returns and laid the foundation for implementation. Steve Rattner at Willett Advisors contends that in a normal
world, the bulk of return comes from beta. Alpha will always be a much smaller component no matter how good
you are at picking managers and no matter how good the managers are.
More recently, CIOs have fine-tuned the lens of the policy portfolio. Asset allocation may drive performance in
retrospect, but few, if any, CIOs profess skill in forecasting asset class returns. Other than their usefulness as
familiar communication language with a board, asset classes leave a lot to be desired as an anchor for portfolios.
For one, asset classes can create rigid investment buckets. Roz Hewsenian finds “the box approach” to be a
disaster. It forces allocators to compromise standards to fill a box and pass on great investments that don’t fit into
one.
Traditional asset allocation is also more sensitive to the past than to recent market conditions. Matt Whineray finds
that asset classes have a life cycle. As more institutional investors get into an asset class, excess returns decline
over time. Paying attention to the changes in asset class attractiveness is an important consideration in future
returns. Along these lines, Ben Inker of GMO contends that no investor can intelligently assess any situation before
answering the question: “What price am I paying?”
CIOs have innovated on the traditional asset class construct. Moving away from a set of asset class targets builds
flexibility into the investment process. Raff Arndt from the Australia Future Fund finds the option value of
flexibility is not something that traditional portfolio theory considers. Jim Williams contends that at the end of the
day, there are really only two asset classes – owning and lending. Everything else is a permutation. Scott Malpass
reduced Notre Dame’s asset classes from six to three, leaving just public, private, and opportunistic, distinguished
primarily by liquidity. These broader categories allow the investment team to search for the best managers and
compare the attractiveness of risk and reward across traditional asset classes.
Seth Alexander at MIT adopted a manager-centric allocation framework in lieu of asset classes. The team searches
for exceptional managers independent of their asset class or strategy, and sizes positions based on their conviction
in the manager, attractiveness of their underlying holdings, quality of their relationship, liquidity, and
diversification characteristics of the strategy to the MIT portfolio. The team carefully measures the resulting risks
and sets aggregate limits to maintain sufficient diversification.41
Matt Whineray deploys New Zealand’s assets through the lens of risk factors. He begins with the creation of a
Reference Portfolio, which is a shadow portfolio of easily replicable, low-cost passive investments. The Reference
Portfolio moves away from asset classes, emphasizing underlying economic drivers of growth, inflation, liquidity,
and agency. It allows the governance board, the Guardians, to estimate expected returns and measure the value of
active deviations from the benchmark.
Matt’s strategic portfolio is composed of a series of risk budgets that ensure diversification and consistent
implementation of active risk. The risk baskets look quite different from common factors in that they define the
drivers of return instead of characteristics of underlying investments. The baskets include Asset Selection,
Structural, Market Pricing – Arbitrage and Funding, Market Pricing – Broad Markets, and Market Pricing – Real
Assets.42
As a note of caution, introducing flexibility removes the guidelines that keep decision makers disciplined. “Market
timing” is an evil phrase in institutional investing that can be synonymous with flexibility. Within a traditional
structure, Jon Hirtle seeks to balance the two through infrequent tilts that can be hugely impactful in avoiding a
bubble maybe once every 10 years.
Team structure
Institutional investment offices tend to focus their efforts on hiring external managers. Allocators believe they will
generate higher returns by partnering with well-resourced specialists across asset classes, geographies, and
strategies than by attempting to compete with them, even after considering the high fee burden involved in doing
so.
Organizing the manager selection team takes on different forms. Jim Williams believes that asset class specialists
are required to develop deep domain expertise and networks, especially in alternatives. In contrast, Brett Barth

-- 53 of 96 --

from BBR Partners and Kim Lew prefer their teams to be generalists where they can make informed comparisons
of risk and reward across the spectrum of opportunities. Donna Snider from Hackensack Meridian Health works
with a hybrid model, where senior investment staff are generalists and junior team members are specialists,
allowing juniors to learn more, contribute faster, and have a better experience by focusing on one area.
Some large pools of capital are shifting assets towards internal management. Hiring teams to directly manage
public and private assets has the benefits of control, liquidity, and cost savings, with the potential drawback of a
smaller universe of talent to hire. Kristian Fok from Cbus Superannuation Fund oversees a fund sufficiently large
that he couldn’t continue to outsource. He needed to do something different to ultimately either increase capacity
or replace the return stream, and turned to internal management. Dawn Fitzpatrick at Soros Fund Management
bridges that gap by managing internally what they’re good at doing themselves and allocating externally with
outstanding people in attractive niches.
Ash Williams believes he can find top managers who would prefer living a lower-cost lifestyle near the beaches in
Florida than earning an incremental dollar in the bustle of New York City. Steve Rattner refers to their internal
direct investing as the special sauce added to an endowment model approach. Steve believes that offering
competitive compensation allows him to hire internally while paying less than the 20% carry of an external
manager.
Successful internal management may be trickier than it appears. Larry Kochard dabbled with an internal portfolio
of public equities in his time at UVIMCO. His team figured out a way of putting on interesting positions directly
based on what they learned from managers, but struggled with managing around the positions and knowing when
to exit.
Canadian pension funds have led the world in moving assets towards internal management, believing they have the
governance, compensation, and talent necessary to succeed. Mario Therrien at CDPQ has watched a shift in
internal management over the last two decades to the point where around 90% of the fund’s assets are managed
internally today. Yet even when the locus of control moves internally, CDPQ sees tremendous value in external
manager relationships as their “window to the world.”
Summary
CIOs articulate an investment strategy that serves as their guiding light to tackle the investment challenge. This
starts with a philosophy and walks through a strategy that sets up the foundation for a CIO to meet their
objectives. They then can turn to executing on the strategy in the marketplace, the subject of the next chapter.
To learn more
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Jon Hirtle – The Pioneer of OCIO (Ep.98)
Capital Allocators: Matt Whineray – Innovation at New Zealand Super Fund (Ep.108)
Books
Pioneering Portfolio Management, David Swensen
39. Chuck Feeney’s incredible legacy is described in “The billionaire who wanted to die broke … is now officially broke,” Forbes, September 15,
2020.
40. Admittedly, even Ben was not aware of the embarrassment and torture the Astros would soon go through when investigators disclosed their
dubious tactics en route to the championship.
41. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Investment Management Company, Alumni Letter, February 2017.
42. Detailed descriptions of the risk baskets are available on the New Zealand Super Fund website (nzsuperfund.nz).

-- 54 of 96 --

F
Chapter 8: Investment Process
“Having a good process basically sets up your chessboard to deal with more crap. It sets it up in a way that
you can take advantage of luck when it comes your way, and that you can defend against the crap when it
comes your way.”
– Jason Karp
ollowing the codification of a strategy, the investment leader turns to the process to put the plan into action.
Jason Klein refers to this as taking a world view and making it an economically exploitable game plan.
A CIO sets the investment strategy in place and reviews it periodically with the board. The CIO then spends their
days implementing the investment strategy, which covers sourcing managers, conducting research, constructing
the portfolio, and monitoring investments. Each component is a multi-step process.
Sourcing managers
A well-defined investment philosophy and strategy helps allocators narrow the massive universe of potential
investments. According to data gathered by NEPC, active managers oversee approximately 3,850 funds in U.S.
equities, 5,100 in international equities, 4,800 in fixed income, 2,300 in balanced strategies, and 8,000 hedge
funds. Add roughly 3,200 private equity managers, 5,400 in venture capital, 1,200 in real estate, and 400 in
infrastructure, and the investable universe for allocators to consider totals at least 34,250 funds.
The binding constraint on reviewing opportunities is time. An investment office’s highest priority is monitoring
their existing portfolio of managers. A typical institution might invest in 100 funds across asset classes and meet
each of those managers two to four times each year. They also spend a substantial amount of time measuring
performance and managing risk. Working with the existing portfolio likely takes up well over half of the team’s day.
A simultaneous priority of an investment team is communicating internally and externally. Teams conduct regular
internal research meetings and periodic Investment Committee meetings, each of which requires substantial
preparation.
With the time left over, investment teams conduct research on new opportunities. This ongoing process includes
reading news, strategy pieces, manager letters, and company reports about areas of interest. This work happens
before preparing for meetings with manager candidates.
An investment staff is probably left with enough time to see 200–400 new funds each year. In other words, a typical
Investment Office reviews no more than 1% of the universe of opportunities potentially available to them. It is six
times more difficult for a manager to get a face-to-face meeting with an institutional allocator than a high school
senior to gain acceptance at Yale or Harvard.
So how does a CIO direct their team to figure out which managers to consider for their portfolio?
Idea generation starts by narrowing the filter with a set of rules and proceeds to fill the pipeline with referrals
from existing managers, ideas from personal and professional networks, shared ideas with peers, and lastly,
inbound solicitations.
1. Narrow the filter
By necessity, CIOs use a set of filters to screen out funds less likely to fit in their portfolio. Raff Arndt, who
oversees the A$160 billion ($105 billion) Australia Future Fund, does not spend time with funds in which he can’t
deploy hundreds of millions of dollars. In contrast, Ellen Ellison from the $3 billion University of Illinois Foundation
has a penchant for managers that are a good bit smaller, but not too small. She tends to avoid big funds and
searches for those that fit a sweet spot between big enough for comfort and small enough to take advantage of less
efficient areas of the markets. Other common screens might include ownership structure, breadth of product
offering, tenure of organization, length of track record, and assets under management.
These rules of thumb will eliminate some outstanding managers from consideration, but errors of omission are less
of a concern for CIOs. Anne Martin of Wesleyan believes, “you don’t have to do every good deal, just every deal
that you do has to be good.” Similarly, Brett Barth is comfortable with not making an investment he wishes he had,
but is really uncomfortable with hiring a manager he wishes he hadn’t.
2. Existing portfolio
Most CIOs find the preponderance of their new investment opportunities from referrals by managers in their
portfolio. Portfolio managers share an investment philosophy with the CIO, fit into the strategy, are selected for
skill, and have a vested interest in the CIO’s success. Scott Malpass views his managers as the smartest people he
knows in the markets. Otherwise, he would not invest with them.
Scott regularly asks managers about the best talent in their space or network. He also turns to managers for
specific on-the-ground insights when considering a new manager for the portfolio.
3. Internal network
CIOs also leverage the personal and professional contacts of team members and the board to identify and screen
new managers. Roz Hewsenian ensures that everyone on the team is part of this process. She believes that young

-- 55 of 96 --

people surface differentiated findings because they are less burdened with the bias that comes with experience.
Some CIOs work with external consultants to broaden their network of opportunities. A CIO may hire a consultant
to outsource idea generation, leverage the consultant’s due diligence resources, serve as a sounding board, or
check-the-box in due diligence. The degree of integration with the consultant is related to the resources of the CIO
– those with more resources of their own tend to rely on outside advisors less.
4. Peers
Institutional allocators travel in packs. Each investment team takes pride in finding their own ideas, but most find
a few trusted peers with whom they share ideas and broaden their intimate networks.
5. Inbound
A harsh reality for many managers is that almost no relationships with allocators arise from inbound cold calls.
Unless a manager has found their way in the door through another manager in the portfolio, the internal network
of the team, or their peers, it can be exceedingly difficult to get the attention of an investment team.
Target characteristics
Allocators dread the question inevitably served up when they speak on a panel in front of an audience of hungry
managers: what do you look for in managers?
Distilling a complex task into a simple framework is insufficient to describe the methodical process allocators
practice every day to fill their portfolios. But if you stay around the industry long enough, you’ll eventually hear a
panel espouse a range of alliterative phrases that attempt to describe rules of thumb for manager selection.
3 As: Approach, Advantage, and Alignment
3 Ps: People, Process, and Performance
5 Ts: Talent, Trendy, Tracking Error, Tails, and Tolls
Each of these simplifications has some merit. They speak to the importance of people, competitive advantage, and
results. I once joined the fray at an industry conference with my own version of alphabet soup. “Location, location,
location” is a commonly used cliché to describe the three most important characteristics of a real estate
investment. I responded with a variation on the theme, that the three most important aspects of hiring a money
manager are the 3 Cs: character, character, and character.
Getting away from forced alliteration, CIOs focus on character, alignment of interests, competitive advantage, and
terms.
1. Character
Every CIO speaks to the quality of people as tantamount in their choice of partners. Guests shared some of their
favorite aphorisms describing why.
“People of great character never lose it. People who do not have great character never get it.”
– Charley Ellis
“Past performance is not necessarily indicative of future results, except when it comes to character.”
– Jon Harris
“There’s no such thing as a good deal with a bad person.”
– Brett Barth, Tom Russo, and Matt Botein
Assessing good character is highly subjective. Judgment, humility, trustworthiness, and ethics are commonly cited
innate characteristics. Other sought-after components include competitiveness, pedigree, curiosity, motivation,
self-awareness, and even-temperament.
CIOs expand their character assessment from the individual leader to the culture of the organization. Randall
Stutman defines culture as the set of learned behavioral norms in the firm. Allocators spend time with the team
surrounding the leader to look for a cohesive, consistent culture.
2. Alignment
The phrase “alignment of interests” is never far from a CIO’s lips. Compensation arrangements, appropriate assets
under management, and transparency all give comfort that a manager will act in a way that serves investors.
Charley Ellis distinguishes between the business of asset management and the profession of investing. The
business is about growing fees and revenues, whereas the profession is about generating excess returns.
Allocators prefer investing with those who practice the profession and monitor the inherent tension between the
two. Managers need a healthy business to pursue the profession of investing effectively, but when economic
incentives swing the pendulum too far away from the profession, results can suffer.
Determining the appropriate asset size for a strategy is more an art than a science. Managers pursuing strategies
that require significant infrastructure may need to be large to compete effectively. Managers in strategies that
benefit from flexibility may find that growth in assets shrinks their opportunity set.

-- 56 of 96 --

The degree of transparency is another important issue. Allocators want to stay on top of the evolving organization
they back, the strategy pursued, and the risk exposure they hold in ever-changing markets. The more open and
frank the lines of communication, the more an allocator gains comfort with the relationship.
3. Competitive advantage
Successful investing requires capturing an elusive “edge.” Michael Mauboussin uses the acronym “BAIT” to
describe the competitive advantage a manager may have, and which allocators seek to identify.43
B: Behavioral – managing around behavioral biases, including overconfidence, confirmation bias,
anchoring, loss aversion and recency bias.
A: Analytical – processing the same information better than other investors, including raw intellectual
horsepower or skill in portfolio construction.
I: Informational – possessing better information than other participants, such as computational power over
short time horizons.
T: Technical – identifying non-fundamental reasons why others act, often arising from principal-agent issues
and liquidity needs and having access to capital to take advantage of dislocations.
In “Investment Lessons” in Part 3, guests share their take on what constitutes an investment edge.
4. Terms
Deal terms factor in as well. Allocators prefer fees tied to incentives, capital duration consistent with the strategy,
and long-term oriented investors alongside them.
Manager fees are a constant source of scrutiny. Boards cannot know net performance, but they see the fees they
pay in advance. The end owners of capital can only “eat” net returns. History has not shined brightly on high fees
across the industry. Peter Kraus from Aperture Investors notes that allocators choose from a pool of managers
whose fee structure and motivation is set up to grow assets, which undermines the performance that the allocator
is trying to achieve.
Larry Kochard tries to figure out ways to reduce fees without sacrificing quality. But many CIOs express that they
are happy to pay for outstanding performance.
“I’m willing to pay almost any level of fees if I believe the net performance is going to be superior.”
– Steve Rattner
“I wake up every morning saying a prayer that I’m going to pay the most in fees this year that I’ve ever
paid.”
– Jon Harris
“People don’t mind paying fees as long as they are structured the right way. If you pay peanuts, you get
monkeys.”
– Rahul Moodgal
“You’re kidding yourself if you think you can get the combination of extraordinary performance and very
low fees. When you find true talent, you have to pay them.”
– André Perold
Beyond fees, allocators study the litany of terms in legal documents to qualify how managers think about and treat
their investors. Christie Hamilton from Dallas Children’s Health finds that it takes work to read all the documents,
because “it’s usually the 10th paragraph on the 30th page that you should question.” Jon Harris wonders whether
private equity investors are limited partners or limited partners. He highlights a litany of terms for investors to
scrutinize in a market that has shifted negotiating power towards managers.44
Due diligence
Conducting research on a new investment opportunity includes a series of face-to-face meetings, behind-the-scenes
research, and an investment recommendation. Allocators evaluate the attractiveness, consistency, and
repeatability of the desired characteristics of managers and their investment process. With the exception of
capacity-constrained situations, allocators typically get to know a manager over years before committing capital.
Bill Spitz compares the manager selection process to dating, saying “you’re better off not making a decision on the
first try.”
1. Meetings
The first few meetings focus on the background of the people and their story, often told in different settings and by
different people to test consistency. When visiting a manager’s office, Tim McCusker from NEPC focuses on seeing
how a team engages with one another. He looks to see the dynamics of the room, the hierarchy of command, and
the quality of exchange. Anne Martin takes managers away from the office to learn more about them. She figures
that if she doesn’t want to go to dinner with someone, she shouldn’t invest. She wants to know that her
relationship with the manager can withstand the terrible times in the trenches together.

-- 57 of 96 --

Later meetings dive into the investment process, portfolio construction, and underlying investments. Scott Wilson
and his team at Washington University in St. Louis re-underwrites a manager’s investments, conducting
independent security analysis to confirm the attractiveness of investment ideas.
2. Research
Allocators complement the set of interactions with an independent review. They read the materials provided by the
manager, confirm statements through research of publicly available information, meet with competitors, and
conduct exhaustive reference checks. Allocators often employ a due diligence checklist to ensure all the work gets
completed.
And lest we forget, allocators will inevitably study past performance. Some will use past performance as an
indicator of future performance. More astute allocators will use the track record to learn more about the
manager’s past behavior in good times and bad. Past performance is not an indicator of future returns, but
temperament tends to persist over time.
CIOs gather all the diligence with their team and weigh the opportunity against risk. Anne Martin is comfortable
moving away from the crowd, but wants to know what she sees that others do not. If she likes a manager and no
other great investors are alongside her, then she goes back to figure out what she thinks that nobody else does.
She may be right, but she wants to triple check her work.
Steve Rattner contends that after all the work, investing in managers is ultimately a judgment call. He looks at the
person to sense if they have the drive and the determination to be great.
3. Recommendation
Allocators encapsulate their research in a written investment recommendation presented to the decision-making
body. These memoranda cover every aspect of the manager – background, team, opportunity, idea generation,
research, decision-making, portfolio construction, risk management, performance, and operations.
Much in the same way traders keep a journal to understand their thought process in real-time, thoughtful
allocators include a concise investment thesis and risks they identify in advance. An effective thesis is based on
disprovable evidence rather than a statement of fact, so that allocators can regularly review the thesis without
being anchored to recent performance. I used to tell my team that a thesis tied to a manager’s intelligence does
not help the investment process unless we periodically tested their IQ score with the intention of redeeming when
we discovered a deterioration. A better thesis might involve one of the BAITs, such as a private equity firm’s ability
to improve profit margins of an acquired business through operational excellence.
Portfolio construction
CIOs determine the size of individual positions by taking into consideration policy asset allocation targets,
conviction in the manager, liquidity profile, and risk. They look through manager line items to the underlying
assets held by the manager when considering the proper position size in the portfolio.
One tricky aspect of portfolio construction is the necessity to blend static, nominal capital commitments to private
funds with a dynamic pool of assets whose value fluctuates based on market conditions. Allocators attempt to
model the expected timing of contributions and distributions across private investments to estimate the
appropriate position size. Still, the Global Financial Crisis left many institutions with higher commitments to
private assets than they intended after their asset corpus shrunk with the collapse of public markets in 2008.
Monitoring
Investment organizations are dynamic. Allocators regularly review their investment thesis and risks to re-
underwrite managers in their portfolio. The process focuses on change relative to expectations in the product and
performance.
1. Product – firm and fund
Investment firms evolve over time. Bill Spitz believes that manager turnover occurs due to qualitative changes in
strategy, style, personnel, or motivation.
Nascent firms have growing pains. Randall Stutman sees expertise limited to investment. Managers really don’t
know how to create an organization, team culture, build people, and most importantly, engage the organization in
a way that is a positive contributor to their investment process.
When firms successfully work through these early stages and generate strong returns, allocators closely monitor
how the manager responds. Good results give the manager an opportunity to grow. Some managers stay
disciplined; others wave in money when it is available.
Managers have an economic incentive to grow assets under management, introducing a set of issues for investors.
Josh Wolfe at Lux Capital draws a parallel with nature – slime mold to be specific. He notes that when resources
are abundant, people feel the freedom to spread out and try lots of experiments. Unfettered asset growth can
infringe on the integrity of the existing strategy, and inbound interest can enable a manager to expand its product
offering. Some asset growth and new offerings add value to the existing fund and strengthen the organization. Too
much can create distractions and add complexity in running the business.

-- 58 of 96 --

Allocators are sensitive to a manager’s need to balance the investment aphorism “size is the enemy of
performance” with the business mantra “grow or die.” Andy Golden sees the benefits of a manager sticking to its
knitting, but recognizes that the world changes and managers have to evolve. The question he poses is whether the
manager is evolving in a way that inspires confidence.
From a personal perspective, good times reveal hubris in some managers and humility in others. Allocators prefer
the latter. Red flags arise when allocators sense overconfidence and greed. Richard Lawrence of Overlook
Investments believes that greedy business philosophies are the enemies of performance more than size. Peter
Kraus finds that when ego-driven investors are successful, they tend to undermine their self-awareness. They
believe too much in themselves and become blind to seeing the truth clearly. Kip McDaniel finds that when people
amass a certain amount of wealth, they control almost every aspect of their lives and fight the few instances when
it is not the case.
Managing through the down times can be a catalyst for change as well. Managers may drift away from a cyclical
strategy that hasn’t been working, creating the prospect of getting whipsawed. Underperformance can be reflexive
for a manager, leading to asset withdrawals and pressure on the business. The smaller the organization, the more
outflows cause fragility. Even allocators who perceive short-term performance challenges as future opportunities
are sensitive to the actions of other investors jeopardizing the integrity of the firm. Adam Blitz has found that
managers can turn losers into permanent losses when they have a weak investor base that gets jittery in a period
of bad performance. Redemptions during these periods force the manager to sell at the worst time.
Tough times also unearth conflicts among partners or key contributors. Many investment organizations are
unstable and rely on the character of a few to hold the fabric together. When friction leads to a separation,
allocators scrutinize what is left afterwards. Exit interviews of departing employees can be a leading indicator of
long-standing organizational issues. Some firms prevent former employees from saying anything of value. Others
are supportive of those moving on to different opportunities. These interviews are put in context. Departing team
members have their own agenda, and firms have a reputation and business to protect. Although allocators may
have to take what they hear with a grain of salt, conducting conversations with former employees helps paint an
insider’s picture of the organization in which they entrusted their capital.
A manager who stays calm better handles inevitable challenges that arise in the business. Resilience and resolve
are essential traits in prolonged success. If the business weathers a storm and the manager demonstrates a steady
hand, allocators are emboldened to stay the course.
2. Performance
Astute CIOs use periods of excessively good and bad performance to calibrate expectations. Strong performance
can be an impetus for undesired change and weak performance can test organizational stability and personal
temperament.
Human behavior leads to performance chasing from both managers and allocators. An investment memo
articulates expected risks to the strategy, and yet CIOs may still struggle when reviewing these risks. Inevitably,
some risks come to pass and coincide with periods of weak performance. Does the risk therefore render the
manager unfit to continue in the portfolio? Or is the risk a natural part of expectations on a bumpy path to
investment success?
Michael Mauboussin reflects on a common situation:
So you give your money to a money manager, and the results have not been good. Either actual skill didn’t
reveal itself or they’ve lost their marbles. Part of the assessment is to say, “Can we constantly reassess the
process?”, “Does the analytical backbone continue to be sound?”, “Is that organization making sure they
are managing and mitigating behavioral things?” and “Are they dealing with agency issues appropriately?”
Icing on the cake
The core engine that drives a CIO’s performance is the collection of managers that survive the rigorous investment
process. It’s the cake, if you will. That cake takes many years to bake from scratch, and the mix of ingredients
changes slowly.
CIOs take pride in forming long-duration partnerships with their managers. The benefits of long-term relationships
include deeper mutual understanding of the mission and value proposition, the delivery of stable capital to pursue
long-term investing, and a shared understanding of expectations.
Infrequent changes to the manager roster leave CIOs with bandwidth to devote to other value-added investment
activities, or the icing on the cake. These activities include rebalancing, overlays, co-investments, low-cost
substitutes, internal management, and relationship management.
1. Rebalancing
When volatility moves the asset allocation away from targets, investors can add incremental returns through the
repeated, disciplined practice of rebalancing assets to targets.45 Michael Cembalest from J.P. Morgan has seen that
investment committees for institutional clients are religious about rebalancing. As asset prices go up, they
rebalance back to normal, and they add risk when markets go down.
Rebalancing typically occurs across U.S. equities, international equities, fixed income, and cash. Allocators get
more granular and rebalance within asset classes, considering capitalization, geography, and other risk factors.
The proliferation of low-cost ETFs provides CIOs readily available instruments to rebalance to target portfolios

-- 59 of 96 --

without needing to change manager allocations. Richard Lawrence points out that rebalancing is perfect because it
is a completely unemotional event.
2. Overlays
The selection of active managers occurs bottom-up. Allocators spend a lot of time and effort aggregating the
exposures of each individual manager to assess risk in the overall portfolio. In addition to rebalancing when
markets move positions away from desired targets, CIOs may use overlay strategies to alter the composition of the
portfolio. Matt Whineray employs a strategic tilting portfolio to emphasize long-term mean reversion in the risk
budget.
Overlay strategies typically reduce risk at perceived extremes in market conditions. Timing peaks perfectly is
impossible, but some allocators act when they sense markets are fraught with risk. These actions start with an
increase in cash balances, where the only cost is opportunity cost. Allocators then tweak the position sizing or
composition of the manager roster, favoring those with lower risk profiles or adding a manager specializing in tail
risk protection. Additionally, CIOs create direct programs to hedge downside tails through put options, futures, or
swaps on equity or fixed income indexes.
3. Co-investments
CIOs take baby steps towards direct investing through co-investments with managers in their portfolio. The
rationale for incorporating co-investments varies across allocators. Roz Hewsenian uses co-investments to increase
private equity exposure at lower cost. Jim Williams believes co-investments make up their best performing
investments across asset classes. Scott Wilson sees co-investments as the sourcing filter to build a concentrated
portfolio.
Co-investment processes to source, screen, and vet the opportunities are designed to match the intent of the
program. Roz reviews private equity co-investments through the lens of manager selection, identifying the greatest
strengths of each manager across size, sector, and geography and co-investing whenever an opportunity arises that
is consistent with those strengths. Jim wants to know that the general partner has real skin in the game and
ensures the manager is putting personal capital into the co-investment. Scott underwrites each individual co-
investment opportunity.
Co-investing is not for everyone. Daniel Adamson, of Wafra and Capital Constellation, finds that asset owners have
eyes that are bigger than their stomachs. Most can’t move quickly enough to get to a decision in time-sensitive
deals.
4. Low-cost manager substitutes
Allocators are cognizant of the high cost of active management services. Those with large balance sheets negotiate
economic terms with managers in situations where they hold bargaining power.
Many also search the markets for opportunities to achieve similar returns to managers at a discount. In my time at
Yale, I followed the closed-end fund market in the U.S. and investment trust market in the U.K. to search for
talented managers overseeing listed funds trading at discounts to net asset value. More recently, some family
offices and institutions have created programs to replicate public manager portfolios by buying stocks listed in 13F
regulatory filings in the U.S. or purchasing publicly listed asset managers. These programs raise intriguing
questions about the nature of the relationship between allocator and manager, and about what constitutes fee-
worthy, value-added services.
5. Internal management
The choice to hire external managers need not consume the entire portfolio. Some institutions have dedicated
internal resources to the most efficient areas of the market, where they may buy low-cost index funds or manage
passive strategies internally. Internal management allows more control and opportunities to conduct capital
market activities that inform the manager selection process. Ash Williams takes a hybrid approach in which
members of his team manage passive and quantitative equity strategies, while others search for outstanding
external managers.
6. Relationship management
Entering a new investment is fun and exciting. CIOs have the privilege of calling the manager to let them know
they are ready to get married for the long term. The honeymoon period is about to begin.
Exiting a relationship is far less enjoyable. Almost all these marriages eventually come to an end. In the best case,
a manager may retire and both sides blissfully waltz into the sunset. Only a tad of residual angst remains for the
allocator, who needs to find a replacement after enabling the manager’s retirement by paying fees over the term of
the successful partnership.
More often, CIOs change their mind. They may have a negative view of future prospects or may conclude they
made a mistake. In private markets, decisions typically come to a head when a manager seeks to raise capital for a
successor fund. In public markets, it can happen at any time.
Irrespective of the cause, CIOs carefully consider the message they deliver when entering and exiting manager
relationships. Setting a proper tone at the onset and conducting themselves with empathy upon departure can
have ripple effects on how they and their organization are perceived in the marketplace. While less direct an

-- 60 of 96 --

impact than the other icing on the cake, a CIO’s conduct can positively or negatively affect their ability to gain
access to desired opportunities down the road.
Summary
A methodical investment process across sourcing managers, conducting due diligence, constructing portfolios,
monitoring, and adding incremental value allows a CIO to implement on their strategy.
Many of the skills required in the process are qualitative. Each of the tools in the toolkit in Part 1 is an example.
But in a world rapidly embracing technology, CIOs also need to consider how quantitative tools can help improve
their investing results, which is the subject of the next chapter.
To learn more
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Scott Malpass – The Fighting Irish’s Twelfth Man (Ep.25)
Capital Allocators: Kim Lew – The Carnegie Way (Ep.52)
Capital Allocators: Andrew Golden – Princeton University’s Chief Investing Tiger (Ep.13)
Every CIO on the show adds value thinking about the investment process. I could not pick among them, so I didn’t.
Scott, Kim and Andy’s conversations are the listeners’ picks – the most downloaded shows among the CIO
interviews.
43. Michael focuses on public equity markets, but his framework is broadly applicable across asset classes.
44. “It is Time for Private Equity LPs to be Accountable,” White Paper, August 2020.
45. Andre F. Pérold and William F. Sharpe described the conditions for the constant mix rebalancing strategy in the 1988 paper, “Dynamic
Strategies for Asset Allocation,” Financial Analysts Journal Vol. 44, No. 1 (Jan–Feb, 1988), pp. 16–27.

-- 61 of 96 --

F
Chapter 9: Technological Innovation
“What gets measured gets managed.”
– Jenny Heller
inancial history repeatedly reminds us that an over-reliance on models can lead to trouble. Seth Masters points
out that risk models assume the world will stay the same as in the recent past, whereas so-called hundred-year
floods occur every decade. CIOs recognize the fallibility of the past in predicting the future and focus decisions on
qualitative factors accordingly.
That said, technological innovation across industries is accelerating change at an unprecedented rate.
Sophisticated quantitative analysis to improve allocator outcomes is still in the early innings. CIOs use some long-
standing tools to look at past markets in calibrating base rates and expectations in asset allocation, risk
management, and performance assessment. Financial technology companies are pushing the envelope to help
public equity managers improve. Their work may be a sign of things to come.
Asset allocation
The math of asset allocation draws on Modern Portfolio Theory, developed by Harry Markowitz in 1952. Taking
inputs of expected return, standard deviation, and correlation across asset classes, Markowitz’s model uses mean-
variance optimization to create an efficient frontier. Along the frontier, investors can choose the asset mix that
offers the highest return per unit of risk.
While elegant in principle, Modern Portfolio Theory is based on assumptions that do not hold in the real world. The
model requires normally distributed returns and accurate, stable expectations of return and risk. It envisions a
trade-off of two asset classes, lacking a consideration of the illiquid assets that appear in institutional portfolios
today.
CIOs also study past events to understand what might happen to their portfolio in future periods of market turmoil.
They conduct Monte Carlo simulations to consider the probability of falling short of long-term investment
objectives, such as purchasing power for a perpetual pool of capital or liability matching for a pension fund.
Scenario analysis and stress tests also help assess possible short-term losses.
Risk measurement
Measuring risk is a backward-looking assessment of the composition of the portfolio. In addition to portfolio-level
metrics, CIOs assess risk manager-by-manager, looking both at return streams and underlying security
characteristics.
Returns-based analysis can unearth hidden factor bets. Allocators identify statistical correlations with risk factors
by regressing a manager’s return stream to historical returns of a range of asset classes. These calculations at
times return spurious correlations, like an unexplainable correlation with an obscure foreign currency. Other times
what appears spurious may spur exploration, such as correlation to the Nigerian naira, a currency tied to a
significant oil-exporting nation.
Allocators also aggregate risk exposures by manager to calculate market risk across factors. Typical risk exposures
include asset class, geography, size, sector, style (value/growth), quality, macroeconomic (interest rates, currency),
ownership, duration, liquidity, and ESG. Measuring risk at a snapshot in time and regularly repeating the exercise
allows allocators to calibrate where and to what degree unintended biases lurk in the portfolio.
Risk management
Measuring risk is a prerequisite for managing risk. The former is an inexact science. The latter is an art. The goal
of risk management is to achieve the maximum return with a given level of risk, or to achieve the minimum level of
risk given a targeted rate of return.
CIOs achieve this by striving to hold a portfolio that takes on prudent risks in accordance with both their long-term
return goals and short-term institutional temperament to stay the course through tumultuous markets. In Part 3,
guests offer their perspectives on managing volatility to survive the bumpy path to investment success.
Risk management is not a cure-all to eliminate downside risk. Without risk, there is no return. It is an attempt to
consider a probability distribution of potential outcomes. When Mark Baumgartner thinks about risk, he looks
carefully at the concentration, leverage, and liquidity of each manager to evaluate the potential for negative
outcomes.
However, the biggest risk to portfolios is an unforeseen tail event. As the late Peter L. Bernstein said, “risk means
you don’t know what will happen.” Financial setbacks over my career, which started a few years after the crash in
1987, included the dot.com bubble in 2000, the Global Financial Crisis in 2008, the coronavirus pandemic in 2020,
and many smaller sell-offs along the way. Each of these were shocks to the system. Doctors referred to SARS-CoV-2
as a “novel” coronavirus. The sudden stop to economies around the world was indeed novel – it had never
happened before.
Each tail event reminds CIOs of the problems of assumptions that underpin models. The dot.com bubble followed
an assumption that the new technology of the internet would forever change how business was conducted and

-- 62 of 96 --

valued, a premise priced into the markets about a decade early. The financial crisis resulted, in part, from
excessive leverage in the mortgage sector based on the underlying assumption that real estate prices across the
U.S. would never fall simultaneously. The pandemic that shook markets in 2020 resulted from an unforeseen health
crisis.
Financial history reminds us that CIOs cannot circumvent every pothole in the road. Risk management instead
applies informed judgement to risk measures to best position the portfolio to meet long-term objectives.
Performance assessment
The tools of performance measurement differ depending on the intent of the exercise. CIOs assess their own
performance, private market managers, and public market managers across a range of metrics to evaluate
success.
1. CIOs
Ultimately, CIOs are accountable for their results. Performance is measured against benchmarks for the policy
portfolio, asset classes, and individual managers. The results are reported to governance boards every quarter,
even though the pool of capital is invested with a much longer duration in mind.
Performance assessment considers a range of measurements. At the total portfolio level, a blended, customized
benchmark of indexes assesses the return of the policy portfolio, allocation shifts away from policy, and
implementation within asset classes. The success of active management within asset classes includes market
indexes and manager peer groups to determine the absolute and relative value-added of manager selection. Some
CIOs are also measured and compensated against a close group of peer institutions. This incentive structure at
times creates the pernicious practice of turning collaborators into competitors.
2. Private market managers
Statistical analysis of private market managers is in the nascent stages. Private market managers typically make
fewer investments and hold positions for longer than public market managers, resulting in a thin data set.
Investment performance in private strategies is also fuzzy. Managers control fund flows in a drawdown structure,
so apples-to-apples time-weighted returns are not relevant. Instead, managers report dollar-weighted returns or
IRRs, which are subject to trickery. IRRs are juiced by credit lines and skewed from early one-off events. The
metric also does not consider the opportunity cost of uncalled capital commitments.
Allocators look across a range of return metrics and cash-on-cash multiples to determine private market manager
performance. Chris Douvos refers to his KPI as “moolah in da coolah.” Allocators use metrics with the acronyms
TVPI (total value to paid-in capital), DVPI (distributed value to paid-in capital), and RVPI (residual value to paid-in
capital) to measure manager success. Any amounts not yet distributed in the calculation of TVPI and RVPI are
subject to fair value manipulation, particularly in situations when managers are preparing to raise capital for a
successor fund.
Deeper analysis of private funds ties results to the people responsible for individual investments and the levers of
return. Allocators carefully track which principals led each investment, as private market owners can significantly
impact outcomes. Private equity allocators dissect whether financial leverage or operating improvements drove
returns and compare those changes to public market peers during the holding period.
The backward-looking nature of statistical analysis tends to be a lagging indicator of private asset performance.
Chris suggests inverting the process by calculating the future exit required of each investment in the portfolio and
checking that outcome against the company’s progress. In the venture capital world, an allocator might ask how
big a company needs to be to return half of the fund. In buyouts, the allocator might study how portfolio companies
are tracking operationally to each return 20% or 30% of the fund.
3. Public market managers
Public markets, in contrast, offer a wealth of data. Allocators calculate a series of statistics to assess manager skill
and behavior. “Past performance is not an indication of future returns” is emblazoned across every investment
manager presentation and legal document. Nevertheless, human nature leads investors to follow strong short-term
performance with their allocations. Allocators will never be rewarded for the past success of a manager.
Thoughtful CIOs scrutinize a track record and use creative analytics to focus on the strengths and weaknesses of
the manager. Allocators weigh an array of statistics to measure returns relative to a benchmark, including time-
weighted and dollar-weighted returns, Sharpe ratio (return per unit of risk, measured by standard deviation of
returns), Sortino ratio (return per unit of downside risk), exposure-adjusted returns, and peer analysis.
Each of these can be fine-tuned depending on the question a CIO seeks to answer. Comparing time-weighted and
dollar-weighted returns can inform a CIO about the quality of the investor base and the manager’s messaging.
Exposure-adjusted returns scrutinize alpha relative to alternatives in the market, and peer groups tease out
whether the investment team made a good choice.
Allocators also use past performance to ask questions about behavior. Questions starting with “What happened
when …”, “What did you do when …”, and “Why did you take that action” around notable stretches of atypically
strong or weak performance can shed light on how a manager may respond to similar periods in the future.
Leading edge of data analytics

-- 63 of 96 --

A small coterie of financial technology start-ups are putting tools to decompose and improve performance in the
hands of allocators and managers. These companies are spin-outs of well-resourced managers, and CIOs can
consider this the next frontier of data analysis. We are still in the early innings of adoption of sophisticated
technology in the allocator game. These tools help in the assessment of manager skill, style drift, and portfolio
manager development.
1. Analyzing manager skill
The increasing availability of granular data can help allocators investigate underlying drivers of return to learn
about manager skill. Basil Qunibi is a former hedge fund allocator who created Novus Partners to help the world’s
top investors generate higher returns. Novus provides tools to analyze the attributes of public equity manager
skill. Basil created a framework that broke down the five degrees of freedom managers deploy in plying their
trade:
1. Exposure – the degree and type of market exposure.
2. Capital allocation – the instruments and sectors the positions represent.
3. Security selection – the stocks picked compared to other alternatives.
4. Position sizing – the success in relative sizing of positions within the portfolio.
5. Tactical trading – the entry and exit of positions.
Studying each of these return drivers separately, Novus uses a set of statistical analyses to pin down the source
and persistence of a manager’s past results. Allocators review a manager’s batting average (% of successful
positions) and slugging percentage (magnitude of positions that generate positive returns vs. negative returns).
Each of these calculations are conducted across geography, market cap, sector, liquidity, and concentration.
A second block of analysis studies a manager’s portfolio in the context of its competitors to inform about drawdown
risk due to liquidity shocks. Novus researches the 4Cs: crowdedness, conviction, concentration, and consensus.
2. Projecting style drift
Understanding the drivers of manager performance alerts allocators to potential issues when a manager grows. If
a manager doubles its AUM, they necessarily change the character of the portfolio across the number of positions,
market capitalization, or liquidity. If the manager maintains the same number of positions and wants to play in the
same market cap space, they will be forced to reduce the liquidity of the portfolio. In his many years analyzing the
data, Basil has yet to see a manager that experienced greater than 60% liquidity deterioration survive in the long
term.
If the manager chooses to maintain liquidity and hold the same number of positions, they will have to invest in
larger market cap names. This practice is condemned by allocators as style drift. Lastly, if they maintain liquidity
and the investable universe, the manager will be forced to diversify into more names.
The analytics that decompose a manager’s skill help inform allocators about risks in the future as changes to the
portfolio and business occur. If the preponderance of a manager’s outperformance occurred in small cap positions,
a decision to move into mid-cap names might not be a good one. A consumer stock specialist departing the firm
may be a problem if the consumer sector was the leading driver of past performance.
Statistical analysis of past performance has its limitations. Full transparency of trading in a fund with reasonable
turnover over a few years is required to draw statistically significant conclusions. Monthly performance attribution
and quarterly 13F filings are not sufficient. Even then, the past is not the future and rigorous statistical work is
only one input that can assist the manager assessment process. Despite these flaws, great analytical work helps
allocators ask better questions and potentially get one step ahead of the future.
3. Portfolio manager development
Modern data analytics help managers recognize and improve their portfolio management prowess. Large platform
hedge funds with frequent trading have the data and resources to extract elusive alpha. Matthew Granade at
Point72 sees advantages to economies of scale in their ability to invest in risk systems, trading systems, data
systems, research and trading.
Jordi Visser at Weiss Multi-Strategy Advisers relates that if he asked someone in the past why they made or lost
money, they told him a story. Armed with data, he can learn the real story and ask questions about the manager’s
actions. He no longer pays attention to stories without supporting data.
Jordi believes you must show managers their biases for them to improve. He compares the practice to watching a
baseball game on television. Statisticians project a box that shows a hitter’s batting average on pitches above and
below their waist. If they are a better low-ball hitter, can access the data, and restrain from swinging at pitches up
in the strike zone, their batting average will improve.
Clare Flynn Levy and Cameron Hight were frustrated former hedge fund managers at smaller shops who felt they
did not have the requisite tools to improve their own skills. They set aside managing money to create software
companies that would help portfolio managers.
Clare Flynn Levy founded Essentia Analytics with a mission to use technology and data to improve investment
performance. Essentia studies trades through the lens of behavioral finance, seeking to identify a manager’s biases
and inform the manager when they might be making a mistake. The assessment includes entering, adding and
trimming, and exiting trades. Nudges assist managers in moving away from their instinctive, reptilian brain –
Daniel Kahneman’s System 1 thinking – and towards their contemplative part of the brain – System 2.

-- 64 of 96 --

There is one aspect of Essentia that needs mentioning. Charley Ellis, the same outspoken proponent of index fund
management described in the Introduction, is a Non-Executive Director of Essentia. Yes, Charley advises a fintech
company whose tools seek to improve the wares of active managers in the public equity markets. As Clare
described on the show, Charley “never said there wouldn’t be active managers, he said there would be fewer of
them.” Touché.
Cameron Hight had an insight that has helped hedge fund managers big and small optimize portfolio construction.
He believed markets move so quickly that a portfolio manager cannot consider all the variables required to
optimize position sizing in real time. His business, Alpha Theory, strives to make the implicit explicit by putting
numbers and probabilities on position sizing decisions.
Alpha Theory uses the investment team’s research to calculate risk and reward in real time. A thorough analyst
already has models and probability scenarios for the potential path a stock might take. Absent new information,
each movement in the stock price changes the attractiveness of risk and reward. Alpha Theory models conviction-
weighted sizing based on the investment team’s research and compares the result to the actual portfolio position
size. Over 15 years of operation, Cameron has reams of data showing that his seemingly simple tool has added
substantial returns for clients who employ it in their practice.
His data also revealed an important conclusion about many fundamental managers. Good active managers perform
far better in their larger positions than they do in smaller names. Alpha Theory wrote “The Concentration
Manifesto,” preaching that managers and allocators would both be better served if managers focus on more
concentrated portfolios of their best ideas.46
Summary
Data analysis almost never gives an allocator the answer, but the tools employed are useful in measuring risk and
return at the portfolio and manager level, and in making informed judgements about manager selection.
The availability of data and the entrepreneurs at the forefront of assessing it enable CIOs to be more informed.
Asking the right questions may reveal managers who eschew modern technology and are a step behind the pack.
As Robert Burns once wrote, the best laid plans of mice and men often go awry. When the most sophisticated
quantitative tools land upon an outlier, CIOs need to respond. The turmoil in markets, employment, and working
protocols caused by Covid-19 in March 2020 presented a recent case study for how CIOs respond to a period of
uncertainty.
To learn more
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Patrick O’Shaughnessy – O’Shaughnessy Asset Management (First Meeting, Ep.1)
Capital Allocators: Jordi Visser – Next Generation of Manager Allocation (Ep.92)
Capital Allocators: Matthew Granade – Inside Data Science at Point72 (First Meeting, Ep.22)
Companies
Novus Partners, www.novus.com
Essentia Analytics, www.essentia-analytics.com
Alpha Theory, www.alphatheory.com
Reading won’t help much in improving investment results through quantitative means. Instead, reach out to
Novus, Essentia, and Alpha Theory to learn more about their application of tools for allocators and portfolio
managers.
46. Cameron Hight, “The Concentration Manifesto,” AlphaTheory, 2019.

-- 65 of 96 --

L
Chapter 10: Case Study of Uncertainty47
“Proper planning prevents piss poor performance.”
– Kim Lew
eadership and management of investment organizations is developed and implemented in normal market
environments. Every decade or so, the markets throw a wrench in any conception of normalcy. These stressful
and uncertain times put leaders to the test.
Michael Mauboussin described the psychological challenges that stress brings:
When we’re stressed, we shorten our time horizons. Precisely when we should be casting our eyes out on
the horizon, we look down. And in life, people generally put much more emphasis on bad things than good
things. Psychologically, between the stress or inability to think in the longer term and this idea that we tend
to place more weight on the negative than positive, the result may not be ideal from an investor’s
perspective.
The Covid-19 pandemic that started in Q1 of 2020 provided a case study in how CIOs handle uncertainty. The novel
coronavirus brought unprecedented challenges in the health and economic welfare of the world.48 CIOs faced
work-from-home restrictions for an indefinite period, stock market volatility, and a sudden stop in the global
economy.
CIOs quickly developed a playbook to lead and manage in the face of uncertainty. Guided by their investment
philosophy, CIOs created a strategy on the fly to work through the uncertain time.
Mark Baumgartner called upon military acronyms, recognizing a VUCA situation (volatile, uncertain, complex, and
ambiguous) that called for an OODA loop (observe, orient, decide, and act). In their own way, a diverse array of
CIOs pursued a similar path.
Each CIO first adapted to a new work configuration. Online communication became the norm across internal
teams, investment committees, and managers. Investment offices tend to be small and accustomed to travel, which
made the transition easier than in more complicated businesses. Full online communication was a small step away
from the norm of frequent remote conversation.
Once the internal team got squared away, CIOs turned to their liquidity status. Most are accustomed to assessing
liquidity on the asset side of their balance sheet, but few previously considered the impact of rapidly rising
liabilities. The pandemic brought questions with unknowable answers:
When would schools be able to reopen to students and play sports, and what might delays mean for
university revenues going forward?
With travel curtailed, what needs would a foundation’s grant recipients have related to continued research?
As hospitals addressed Covid-19, how would the fall-off of high-margin voluntary procedures impact
revenues and margins?
How would the sudden stop of revenues change the funding picture for corporate pensions?
How should superannuation funds balance future retirement needs with the dire near-term economic
hardship for its members?
The potential shock to revenues created a new variable that CIOs needed to consider before deploying capital in
opportunities presented by markets.
CIOs conducted a flurry of information gathering from their managers to process what had happened, calculate
performance, and assess risk. They read voraciously and called select experts in their network to get a sense of
what problems may lie ahead and what opportunities may arise. Many conversations informed and confirmed
expectations. Some raised alarm bells, while others suggested a whiff of opportunity.
Big market swings provide key moments to calibrate risk and expectations. Those with proper technology and data
systems rolled-up individual results and had a firm grasp on what transpired. Those without modern technology
were a few steps behind. Leaning on base rates proved particularly helpful when considering future opportunities.
At the same time, experienced CIOs were slow to act. Andy Golden took a step back and wondered if he was
focusing on the right things. The pandemic triggered epistemological questions about what his team knew and how
they knew it. He was both proud that his team had gained wisdom from its past crisis experiences and
embarrassed at having fallen short on some of the same lessons, particularly in feeling overconfident in what could
transpire in their portfolio and the world. Crisis moments cause great leaders to check their ego at the door and
retest their assumptions before acting.
When the time for action was at hand, allocators turned to their trusted manager roster. Absent a change in their
investment thesis with the manager, allocators rebalanced by adding on weakness and trimming from strength.
The most meaningful allocations went towards previously closed managers or managers with expertise in a
particularly attractive area of the markets.
All these steps looked like shelter-in-place to anyone outside of the pre-existing portfolio. Almost none of the
whirlwind of activity translated to significant action. The standard employed by CIOs at that time was don’t just do
something, sit there.
Only after the dust settled would allocators begin to focus on new opportunities. As Sandra Robertson of Oxford
University Endowment Management described in mid-April 2020 after the public equity markets rapidly

-- 66 of 96 --

rebounded, “it’s too late to sell and too early to buy.”
When allocators get ready to turn to new relationships, they start with a prepared checklist of managers on a
watch list. The list inevitably includes previously closed private equity or venture capital funds, highly ranked
private credit managers, and public equity managers they have been learning about for years. Well-prepared CIOs
have a shopping list ready to go when assets go on sale.
Lastly, allocators look for tactical opportunities that appear attractive when market volatility subsides. In the
Covid-19 pandemic, CIOs eyed distressed debt if a wave of bankruptcies ensued, private credit if spreads stayed
wide, travel and leisure sectors across asset classes, and potential opportunities in real estate once new ways of
living and working got established.
Allocators never envisioned creating a checklist to manage through a pandemic, yet the sequence of events of
setting internal functioning, gathering information, assessing liquidity and risk, monitoring the existing portfolio,
mining the existing portfolio, reaching out to their wish list, and engaging in new relationships, became the
common playbook to stay true to their mission at a precarious time.
And just as soon as the turmoil roiled markets, the markets roared back. Most of the furious activity conducted by
CIOs led to no meaningful portfolio changes, but the exercise allowed them to be prepared for the next time.
47. This section draws heavily on an opinion piece I wrote that was first published in Institutional Investor on April 24, 2020 entitled “Don’t Just
Do Something, Sit There.”
48. The pandemic was sufficiently unprecedented that corporate executives used the word “unprecedented” in their communications a large
multiple of any time before, and Google Trends had record searches for the word. See John Authers, “Don’t Blame Me for Unprecedented Use
of This Word,” Bloomberg, May 7, 2020.

-- 67 of 96 --

Part 3: Nuggets of Wisdom

-- 68 of 96 --

Every guest on the show brings a unique story and set of experiences that inform how they invest their capital. The
lessons they shared shaped the Toolkit and Investment Frameworks in Part 1 and Part 2.
In addition to these big ideas, our conversations are littered with nuggets of wisdom about investing and life.
These nuggets are shared here in Part 3.

-- 69 of 96 --

S
Chapter 11: Investment Lessons
killed practitioners develop subtle insights from years of experience in the investment process. Each has its
own twist. Together, they provide a condensed wealth of knowledge.
As Patrick O’Shaughnessy said:
No one’s ever got it figured out. You have to evolve what you’re doing. The best way to do that is be
insatiably curious, gather as much information as you possibly can, and talk to as many people as you
possibly can.
This curation of terrific investment gems is an attempt to do just that across the following topics:
Nature of markets
Inconvenient truths
Managing volatility
Investment selection
Gaining an edge
Asset class perspectives
Nature of markets
Investing is a blend of analysis and psychology. Managers on the show shared some of their thoughts on the nature
of markets.
“Rising prices attract buyers, and falling prices attract sellers. It is literally that simple.”
– Michael Batnick
“We’re in the investing business, but it’s sort of like we’re in the fashion business. Skirts come up and down
in our industry.”
– Anthony Scaramucci
“Great bubbles happen around great stories.”
– Michael Novogratz
“The market is a complex, adaptive system, which explains both why markets tend to be efficient – the
wisdom of crowds – and why markets episodically go haywire.”
– Michael Mauboussin
“It’s not just the non-predictable regime shifts that cause abrupt moves in any financial instrument, it’s the
over-reliance on short-term market financing to underpin positions.”
– James Aitken
“In times of easy money, a lot of stupid things work. A lot of unprofitable companies see massive increases
in stock price. A lot of bad ideas get funded, and some of those bad ideas actually turn out to be good
ideas.”
– Dan Rasmussen
“A lot of things become more predictable over a long time horizon.”
– Ben Inker
“Markets, economies, innovation, politics, weather, and everything in nature all move through long-term
cycles.”
– Eric Peters
“There are times in the markets where things are incredibly interesting. There’s a lot of volatility, and your
ability to add value is very high. There are other times when markets are dull, spreads aren’t moving very
much, and markets are not very volatile.”
– Steve Kuhn
“If we all know what will happen tomorrow, it’s not going to happen. Everybody will act differently.”
– Emanuel Friedman
Inconvenient truths

-- 70 of 96 --

Morgan Housel from the Collaborative Fund says that investing is the only field where someone with no education,
background, or experience can vastly outperform someone who has the best education, best background, and best
experience. It is impossible to envision someone with no education or background performing open heart surgery
better than a Harvard trained cardiologist. That world would never exist. But it happens in investing every day.
Morgan’s insight is one of many inconvenient truths about investing. Other guests on the show offered more.
Investing in managers
“There might only be 50 or 60 investors in the world who really can do this model well.”
– Scott Malpass
“Everybody believes they’re in the above-average managers. It’s like Lake Wobegon children.”
– Jon Hirtle
“Very few of our best investments have had every single box checked absolutely perfectly. In fact, some of
our more mediocre investments had been the things that initially checked every box.”
– Adam Blitz
“The Paradox of Choice profoundly states that humans are wired to want more choice and more
opportunity, but the more choice they get, the more miserable they become.”
– Brian Portnoy
“Most institutions are prone to overdiversification or its cousin, diworsification.”
– Andy Golden
“An edge is something that can slip away very quickly.”
– Kim Lew
“Good producers in almost any profession seldom make for good leaders. Money managers for the most
part are highly specialized producers.”
– André Perold
“Most specialist managers believe that their asset class is good, no matter what. It’s like asking a potato
farmer what’s for dinner tonight? There’s going to be potatoes on the menu at some point.”
– Jon Hirtle
“Great managers, really fantastic brand-name, terrific, best-investor-in-the-world types of managers have
just okay outcomes in the last five years relative to the market.”
– Mark Baumgartner
“We’re not willing to have 10 years where value is out of favor and have 90 per cent of our book in value
managers. We just can’t.”
– Scott Malpass
“Asset allocators are not long-term in their thinking. There’s a constant ebb and flow of ankle biters, people
who come in when you’re doing well and then immediately leave when it turns. I was just astonished by
that pattern of behavior.”
– Steve Galbraith
“If you’re managing someone else’s money, there’s a level of either absolute or relative loss that you can’t
go beyond and continue to sit in the seat.”
– Larry Kochard
Investing in markets
“Every time you buy or sell, you’re buying or selling from somebody else just as smart, tight-fisted, well-
organized, computerized, and fully informed as you are.”
– Charley Ellis
“It’s very difficult to get a man to understand something if his salary or management fees depend upon him
not understanding it.”
– James Aitken
“If you learn one thing as a philosophy student, it’s that you’re probably not right.”
– Daniel Adamson
“There are a lot of good ways to invest, but ‘buy high, sell low’ is not one of them.”

-- 71 of 96 --

– Sarah Williamson
“Being contrarian means you have to be able to do some uncomfortable things.”
– Andy Golden
“Baron Rothschild said about 200 years ago, ‘Buy when there’s blood in the streets,’ but we usually forget
the second half of his aphorism was, ‘Even if the blood is your own.’”
– Larry Siegel
“There are limits to value investing. Ben Graham got crushed in the Depression. He couldn’t resist the
values. He went in early and got destroyed.”
– Michael Batnick
“One of the reasons that active managers underperform consistently is because everybody’s doing the same
thing.”
– Paul Black
“I’ve seen charlatans who have great results, and some of the smartest people I’ve ever encountered with
some of the best processes who have not done well for four years in a row.”
– Jason Karp
“Investment horizons have shrunk to the point that running a commercial business and being wrong for
eighteen months are almost mutually exclusive.”
– Steve Galbraith
“Everything is securities fraud. If a bad thing happens and the company didn’t disclose the bad thing, that’s
securities fraud. Meanwhile, if the executives were selling stock without disclosing the bad thing, that’s
insider trading.”
– Matt Levine
“Trends often extend well beyond what people can contemplate or imagine. If you can ride a trend for a
long period of time, there’s a good chance that a lot of super smart people will have gotten in and gotten
out way too soon.”
– Eric Peters
“When you get any type of dramatic change, no one wants to believe in it. It’s hard to believe because it
doesn’t happen that often.”
– Emanuel Friedman
“When money moves in very quickly to solve a problem, it artificially holds the bottom higher than it
should. That works until it doesn’t.”
– Tim Recker
“Even when you know a crisis is coming, you don’t want to believe it’s coming so you have trouble acting.
That’s just a basic lesson of human life.”
– Emanuel Friedman
“Correlations really can go to one.”
– Andrew Tsai
“When you get a panic in markets, no theater has access big enough to handle the stampede.”
– Ash Williams
“When things go bad, they can get much worse than you expect. Things can happen that don’t make sense.”
– Andrew Tsai
“Luck is really anathema to sports. We work hard and we game plan and strategize, and we compete and
sweat. We don’t want to think that this is just in the hands of fate. The same is true with investing, but luck
plays a real role.”
– Jon Wertheim
Managing volatility
Every allocator and most managers profess they are long-term investors. Their experience in tough times – bad
markets, losses, underperformance, and stress – determines whether their intentions play out. One consistent
theme from guests is their effort to dampen downside volatility to survive the long term.

-- 72 of 96 --

“If you can soften your negative periods, you compound faster and the end result over time is dramatic.
Think about it in life, if the bad times are just a little less bad, life would be wonderful.”
– Chris Ailman
“I am a big believer in keeping some dry powder for a rainy day, even though I don’t think investing for
Armageddon is a good strategy.”
– Ellen Ellison
“One of the first lessons you learn as an options trader, and the most painful lesson to watch, is gap risk.”
– Dawn Fitzpatrick
“The manager of portfolios and the owner of a business need the capacity to suffer.”
– Tom Russo
“An intolerance for big drawdowns over long time frames could potentially lead to poor decision-making.”
– Raphael Arndt
“As long as you’re not leveraged and forced out of a trade at an inopportune time, you can last a long time.”
– Jeff Solomon
“When people are trying to mitigate a risk, there is an expensive way and a range of cheaper ways to offset
negative carry. When you get a really big dislocation, people who have tried to offset that carry are often
the ones who end up blowing up.”
– Eric Peters
“Everybody hates drawdowns except for perma bears, people short the market, and behavioral scientists.”
– Dan Egan
Investment selection
CIOs and managers also shared aspects of their selection process.
“We want to invest in managers that are driven by performance. That might be performance fees, return on
their own money, or just their ego.”
– Brett Barth
“Boutique is better, hungry is better, and having business risk is better.”
– Sam Sicilia
“The most thoughtful investors are the ones who can distill a complex concept into an easily digestible
nugget in 30 seconds.”
– Christie Hamilton
“Know as much as you can and know when you don’t know enough. If you don’t know enough, don’t invest
because you’ll never have the conviction to double down if it goes against you.”
– Ana Marshall
“When you try to say, ‘here’s my view of the world, let’s shove a mediocre manager in the portfolio to fit
that view of the world’, you end up making mistakes. The scarce resource is really great managers.”
– Adam Blitz
“First you have to convince yourself on an idea, and then you need to convince someone else. And those
require very different skills.”
– Paul Johnson
“Every portfolio manager asks the same four questions: what’s the upside, what’s the risk, how did the
market get it wrong, and is the mispricing going to be corrected?”
– Paul Johnson
“It’s always two or three cards in a hand – the fundamental things about a business that matter. Part of the
process is to see if Mr. Market picks up the same three cards that we do.”
– Drew Dickson
“The biggest mistake in the investment business is a failure to distinguish between fundamentals and
expectations.”
– Michael Mauboussin
“In order to have an optimally functioning relationship between the analyst and the portfolio manager, each

-- 73 of 96 --

of them has to do 90% of the work and take 48% of the credit.”
– Paul Johnson
“Deciding when to sell is one of the unheralded challenges of our business. Selling is absolutely essential
when 1) you realize you’ve made a mistake, 2) you’re offered tomorrow’s price today, 3) you are
rebalancing the portfolio, 4) you have more ideas than space in the portfolio, and 5) you realize a
company’s prospects are changing.”
– Richard Lawrence
Gaining an edge
Michael Mauboussin’s BAIT gives an overview of the categories that create an investment edge. Managers work
hard to gain an advantage, and allocators do the same to identify a repeatable one in managers. Whether
structural, cyclical, or niche, managers and allocators have their own perspective on what constitutes a
competitive advantage.
“We want to find a sustainable competitive advantage through their culture, processes, and ability to adapt
through various cycles.”
– Sandra Robertson
“Yale has all kinds of competitive advantages. Everybody loves David Swensen. Everybody loves the idea of
working for Yale. He’s got this best team on his side, picking and working with managers. If you have a
relationship with Yale, you know it’s going to be a long-term relationship. The average tenure of their
manager relationships is approximately 14 years. That’s the average, even though they usually invest with
people on day one or before day one.”
– Charley Ellis
“The people that we think are really successful are just as hungry at age 60 as they were at age 40.”
– Wayne Wicker
“Alpha is scarce and hard to find. You don’t find it on the corner of Fifth Avenue and 47th Street. It may sit
there occasionally, but not all the time. So you need to go where it is, where there are dislocations and
capital shortages in the world.”
– André Perold
“Everything in finance will be discovered and arbitraged away except human judgement.”
– Jason Karp
“Active management is all about behavioral alpha: the ability of getting out of stuff at the right time and
sizing up at the right time, admitting that you made a mistake and folding your hand and moving on to the
next one. Those are not easy decisions for people to make.”
– Jordi Visser
“If you meet a manager who teaches you something that’s really new and different, then you have a chance
of getting exceptional returns from that manager. Otherwise, they’re all moving in a herd and doing the
same thing.”
– Larry Siegel
“The secret to successful active investing is to have the presence of willing, serial, repetitive or habitual
losers.”
– Charley Ellis
“Turnover is deadly in our business, so to the extent that you can keep leadership and strategy intact for at
least a decade, that’s a major advantage.”
– Ellen Ellison
“What makes a great fund manager is that they are long time. They are never short time. They never give
their time away.”
– James Aitken
“The key is learning where to focus. Having breadth, knowing where change is going to happen, and then
using research abilities to focus on that change and gather all the data points you possibly can about that
change.”
– Jean Hynes
“The farther afield you go from the mainstream, the more likely you are to find great deals.”
– Larry Siegel

-- 74 of 96 --

“Alpha lives in doing things other people are unwilling or unable to do. Unwilling because it’s tedious and
boring, or unable because of capacity issues.”
– Dan Rasmussen
“The evidence is super clear that you must have a philosophy of long-term thinking in order to operate a
management system that can operate for decades and produce world-leading performance.”
– Eric Ries
“Our cap on subscriptions has proven to be perhaps the single most important business decision in
delivering superior results to our investors.”
– Richard Lawrence
“Through concentration and thoughtful analysis, discretionary managers can continue to do well. But if
there’s a data set and a quant can find it, eventually they will.”
– Patrick O’Shaughnessy
“After Moneyball, we were taught to think that numbers are far superior to human intuition. But humans
can detect things that numbers can’t describe. The trick is to properly process those observations and
incorporate them to get the best out of both man and machine.”
– Ben Reiter
Asset class perspectives
Each asset class has its own set of opportunities and risks. Guests shared perspectives on opportunities and risks
in hedge funds, private equity, venture capital, and a few other corners of the markets.
Hedge funds
Opportunities
“Hedge funds are the point guard on the basketball team. They see the whole action in front of them.
Sometimes they put up big numbers, dropping in some three pointers. Other times they just set up their
teammates and pass the ball off.”
– Jim Williams
“When times are really rocky, hedge funds can be enormously valuable. When those times come along, a 5%
or 10% allocation to hedge funds isn’t enough for preservation of capital. The problem is allocators don’t
put enough money into hedge funds.”
– Doug Phillips
“Successful hedge fund managers make money in very different ways, but they all have in common the
inherent flexibility to go where the best opportunities sit and invest with conviction.”
– David Zorub
“The hedge fund industry has transitioned and morphed. Risk mitigation has usurped return enhancement.”
– Adam Blitz
“The difference between traditional asset managers and hedge funds is blurring. It’s all about what value a
manager can deliver above and beyond what I can do for myself.”
– Dawn Fitzpatrick
Risks
“The essential skill of a hedge fund manager is continuing to run a hedge fund.”
– Matt Levine
“All the gigantic multi-strategy absolute return funds are predicated on volatility scaling. When implied
volatility comes down, they increase exposure to keep up returns.”
– James Aitken
“Finding good macro managers is incredibly challenging because it’s often hard to distinguish if someone’s
track record is a function of incredible skill and foresight or just dumb luck.”
– Adam Blitz
“Macro has an emphasis on gurus. It’s a crystal ball and a black box.”
– Jonathan Tepper

-- 75 of 96 --

“You can play the middle market in distress, but really you’re on a raft on the big guy’s stream. You are not
the guy who creates the stream.”
– Peter Troob
Private equity
Opportunities
“I was in the private equity sausage factory for a decade and I love the sausage. I think it’s a really good
asset class and I like what it does for overall portfolio returns.”
– John Pfeffer
“As David Swensen said, the ultimate form of capitalism is private equity. You have a long time horizon,
you’re not beholden to quarterly numbers, you can do the right thing, and there are many levers you can
pull.”
– Bill Spitz
“Private equity firms with persistence are incredibly powerful businesses. They’re franchises with access to
deals, all sorts of levers of power, control over their suppliers, and control over their customers.”
– Mark Baumgartner
Risks
“The fee drag of private equity is the biggest of any asset class.”
– Steve Rattner
“You can’t time the private equity market. You can’t pick your EBITDA multiples because the partnerships
have their own five-year investment period.”
– Chris Ailman
“Subscription lines have become a significant piece of the private equity industry and represent material
risk to LPs.”
– Steve Nelson
“Our portfolio has no large buyout managers at all because we think that large buyouts are just leveraged
equities. If there’s skill added on top, and there might be, then most of the value goes away in fees.”
– Raphael Arndt
“80% of deals for small businesses don’t close, and that’s after you come to an agreement on all the
material deal terms and sign a letter of intent.”
– Brent Beshore
“There are 500 companies that have been owned consecutively by three or more private equity funds.
Reducing that frictional cost can have a significant impact on returns.”
– André Bourbonnais
“True proprietary transactions are very rare. They exist, but they’re very rare.”
– André Bourbonnais
“As you pay higher prices, you get hit in private equity in two ways. First, you can’t get multiple expansion,
and second, you increase bankruptcy risk by taking on so much debt.”
– Dan Rasmussen
Venture capital
Opportunities
“Venture always ends up on the efficient frontier. You draw the curve of an optimal portfolio and venture is
always there.”
– Chris Douvos
“Venture capital is important as a hedge. There’s a good chance that the next 20–30 years are going to see
a pace of technological change like nothing we’ve ever seen. If you’re only invested in incumbent
businesses and industries, that could really catch you out.”
– John Pfeffer
“Venture capital is like Congress. Everybody hates Congress but loves their Congressperson.”

-- 76 of 96 --

– Chris Douvos
“This an access class, not an asset class.”
– Jim Williams
“Venture capital has very high autocorrelation. It’s just a big unfair advantage. Once you’re winning, you
can keep winning if you do it right.”
– Joe Lonsdale
“Venture investing has this blunt tool to buy equity in start-ups. Every venture fund claims to have the same
cost of capital. Some top tier firms should have a lower cost of capital.”
– Ali Hamed
“A classic cliché in venture capital, would you rather have an A technology with a B team or a B technology
with an A team? And it’s always the latter. You want amazing people.”
– Josh Wolfe
Risks
“Capital is getting very concentrated in the VC industry because companies are staying private longer and
absorbing more capital. Therefore, managers are busy with their portfolio companies. That doesn’t leave a
lot of capacity to do new deals.”
– Beezer Clarkson
“Henry McCance once said to me: When venture is working really well, time is really cheap and capital is
really expensive. What happens in bubbles is that people don’t have any time. As a result, their capital
becomes cheap. When capital is cheap and time is expensive, watch out.”
– Chris Douvos
“If you can’t be with the best manager in venture capital, don’t do it. Don’t spend much time on it or try to
find a fancy way around it, just don’t do it at all.”
– Karl Scheer
“There are two cardinal sins in this business. One is getting the company right but not investing enough, so
that when it becomes a very large company, it doesn’t move the needle. The other is the sin of omission
versus the sin of commission.”
– Scott Kupor
“Private equity is changing from GPs as the sun of the solar system and everything revolving around them,
to entrepreneurs being the sun of our solar system where we are just one of many planets.”
– Mike Mauzé
Other assets
“We don’t invest in asset classes; we invest in people.”
– Tom Lenehan
“To be a growth investor, you have to be optimistic about the future. Optimists are the ones who ultimately
get it right.”
– Paul Black
“Buying high-yield bonds is like shopping at the mall. You know what you’re looking for and what you’re
going to buy. Structured credit is like going to a Turkish bazaar. You show up with money and you look
around. You have to have an open mind to see the one valuable vase that no one else sees, and then be
ready to buy it.”
– Brett Jefferson
“If you can find an optimistic fixed income guy, I’d love to meet him.”
– Tim McCusker
“For the average individual investor, leveraged ETFs are dynamite. They’re going to blow off a toe because
the structure promotes bad behavior.”
– Tom Lydon
“Options are tools analogous to pharmaceuticals. When you know how to use them, follow the prescription,
and work with experts, they can be wonderful things. When any of those things doesn’t happen, they can be
a bad thing.”
– Rick Selvala

-- 77 of 96 --

“There are 7,000 minor leaguers, and less than 10% will play a day in the major leagues. Less than 3% will
actually get to arbitration and make big money. We believe that over half of the players we sign will play a
day in the majors.”
– Michael Schwimer

-- 78 of 96 --

A
Chapter 12: Life Lessons
t the end of each episode, I close with a series of questions that broadens the perspective of the guest’s
interests and beliefs. The last two questions give guests an opportunity to reflect on what matters most. They
are the following:
1. What teaching from your parents has most stayed with you?
2. What life lesson have you learned that you wish you learned a lot earlier in life?
The answers to these questions have offered a treasure chest of wisdom. What follows are some jewels across a
few categories:
Managing emotions
Continuous improvement
Relationships
Work ethic
Facing reality
What matters most
Managing emotions
In their own way, guests on the show have expressed the value of being present and staying positive.
Presence
“Age quod agis – do what you’re doing.”
– Michael Mauboussin
“Don’t just do something, stand there.”
– Jon Wertheim
“Think twice and act once.”
– Tom Bushey
“The answer will come to you; there’s no need in chasing it.”
– Ellen Ellison
“You’re unable to control the future and the past is the past. You have to focus on right now, and you’re
really not even able to control that. What you are able to control is your own behavior.”
– Karl Scheer
“One of the most important things to do in stressful times is calm yourself. If you can’t calm yourself or
slow yourself down, your fears will run away with you.”
– Michael Mervosh
Positivity
“We are always plagued with our fears, doubts and insecurities. It doesn’t matter who you are in the
world.”
– Chatri Sityodtong
“People generally put much more emphasis on bad things than good things. That emanates from this
concept of loss aversion.”
– Michael Mauboussin
“Take yourself seriously, but not too seriously.”
– Seth Masters
“Private optimism and public despair are an interesting conflict. On one side people are quite optimistic
about themselves, but at the same time are pessimistic about the rest of the world.”
– Tali Sharot
“There is only so much that fits into a basket of worries. If you’re going to worry about something, make
sure that you have got something else you can throw out of your basket so that it fits.”
– Ana Marshall

-- 79 of 96 --

“You do not have to beat yourself up to be a high performer. Negative self-talk has negative expected utility
in your life.”
– Khe Hy
“It’s quite difficult to not let previous things affect your future performance. And the only way you can do
that is very extensive preparation and sticking to the plan.”
– Dr. Sarel Vorster
Continuous improvement
Continuous learning and growth come with obstacles and challenges. Upside rewards await those who persevere.
Growth
“I love the Isaac Asimov quote: past glories are poor feeding.”
– Patrick O’Shaughnessy
“Just because you’re good at something doesn’t mean you should do it for the rest of your life.”
– Chatri Sityodtong
“Keep learning. Keep expanding your world. The world is a big place.”
– Mark Baumgartner
“You don’t know what you’re capable of until you do something that you didn’t think was possible.”
– Jay Girotto
“Move from certainty to curiosity. If you live a more curious life, you’re going to listen more. You’re going to
be more interesting. You’re going to learn a lot more.”
– Thomas DeLong
“Take the less obvious path when it feels right to you.”
– Seth Masters
“There’s never a perfect time for anything.”
– Tom Bushey
“Sometimes a reward will only come through an ordeal, because the ordeal makes you have to let go of
what you’re clinging to.”
– Michael Mervosh
“Walking towards something that scares you is something you always have to do in your life, even though it
never feels particularly good in the moment.”
– Jenny Heller
“It’s okay to fail if you try really hard and give it your all. It’s not okay to fail because you got distracted and
you decided to quit.”
– Joe Lonsdale
“Own your mistakes, let them go and move on. The faster people can learn to do that, the happier they are.”
– Michael Novogratz
“Two simple rules: find a great mentor and get rid of them.”
– Jonathan Tepper
Optionality
“Lucky people are the ones who try lots of things, cut out the things that don’t seem to work, and continue
doubling down on the things that do work.”
– Dan Ariely
“As I think back on the most amazing experiences that really made a difference in my life, not one has been
planned for.”
– Steve Nelson
“When you can identify a directional arrow of progress, it holds secrets for you to unlock.”
– Josh Wolfe

-- 80 of 96 --

“If you don’t know where you’re going, any path will get you there.”
– Peter Troob
“Take risks. Even if you think it’s a big risk, doors open, and people help you. People want you to succeed
and like to see you take risks.”
– Peter Troob
“The biggest regrets that you have when you get older are not the things that you did that didn’t go well.
It’s the things you never tried.”
– Jim Williams
“Take care of your stuff, beware of debt, and time will tell.”
– Dr. Sarel Vorster
Relationships
In a people business, interpersonal conduct is a long-term game. Guests offered advice on human behavior and
how to build and maintain strong relationships.
“It’s pretty simple. Treat people the way you want them to treat you.”
– Meredith Jenkins
“Be fair, honest and straightforward in every walk of life. Treat people with respect. Work hard. Do the
right things. Good things happen.”
– David Barrett
“To unleash your greatness, surround yourself with greatness.”
– Chatri Sityodtong
“Sometimes it is better to be caring than smart.”
– Tom Russo
“Empathy is probably the most powerful skill that any person can have no matter what you do.”
– Paul Rabil
“So much of what you want to do in life is build a network of people where you can add value and who can
help you as well.”
– Scott Kupor
“If the elevator comes to you and takes you up, send it back down.”
– Rahul Moodgal
“If you have one really, really good friend in your life, you’re doing a lot better than most people.”
– Annie Duke
“Everybody won’t always have the same objective as you, including close friends. Don’t take that
personally.”
– Jon Harris
“Sometimes it only takes small gestures to make stressful situations less stressful and get people through
difficult times.”
– Michael Cembalest
“It’s destructive when we make assumptions about someone’s intentions. I can’t know your intent and you
can’t know mine. We should give people the benefit of the doubt.”
– David Druley
“Watch what people do, not what they say.”
– Clarke Futch
“You can never be compensated enough for dealing with bad people.”
– Matt Botein
“Life is sort of like one big card game. Unless you are incredibly good at reading tells of human behavior,
there’s a very good chance that you have no idea what cards are involved or where your hand stacks up.
Play accordingly.”
– Ash Williams

-- 81 of 96 --

Work ethic
There’s no shortcut to doing the work. Guests shared their perspective on what that means.
“The characteristics of the most successful people in any field are grit and perseverance. In the martial arts
world, it is called a warrior spirit.”
– Chatri Sityodtong
“Keep showing up, keep doing what you’re doing. You’ll be there when good things happen.”
– Paul Black
“To the extent that you can find something that you’re just a little better than others at, it goes a long way.”
– Gregory Zuckerman
“With focus comes success.”
– Richard Lawrence
“When there’s a hole that needs to be dug, pick up a shovel and start digging.”
– Tom Lenehan
“There’s literally no way around the work that’s required to create something meaningful with an impact
and legacy.”
– Paul Rabil
Facing reality
Seeing life as it is instead of how we want it to be is a common life lesson.
“People are messy, and businesses are messy. You’ve just got to be able to work through the mess.”
– Brent Beshore
“Make peace with the mundane, because most of life is average.”
– Daylian Cain
“Many intuitions we have about the right thing to do are faulty.”
– Dan Ariely
“Failure is not only an option, but it’s also a necessity in life.”
– Clare Flynn Levy
“Confidence does not equal competence.”
– Tali Sharot
“What we know sits on the head of a pin. What we don’t know is the size of the universe.”
– Annie Duke
“Every cloud has a silver lining, and every silver lining has a cloud.”
– Jon Hirtle
“When I got a taste of financial success and status recognition, I thought that all of a sudden rainbows
would form in the sky, the oceans would part as I walked, and everyone would be my friend. But instead I
realized nothing about my life had changed.”
– Khe Hy
“As an investor and entrepreneur, everything takes longer and is harder than you thought it would be at the
outset.”
– Dan Rasmussen
“If something sounds too good to be true, it probably is.”
– Donna Snider
“Change isn’t that bad if you’re the one doing it.”
– Jeff Solomon
“From Ralph Waldo Emerson, life is a succession of lessons that must be lived to be understood.”
– Jordi Visser

-- 82 of 96 --

What matters most
Keeping work in perspective makes it all worthwhile.
“All of the great wisdoms are really true: Don’t sweat the small stuff; Spend time with those you love; Find
your balance; Most people spend a lot less time thinking about you than you think they do.”
– Beezer Clarkson
“My dad said, son, your priorities are God, family, friends, school and sports, in that order.”
– Jim Dunn
“The single most important ingredient to life is your health. If you’re not healthy, everything else is
worthless. And if you’re not happy with what you do every day, and you’re not healthy on top of it, then it’s
a disaster.”
– Jason Karp
“When you think about your kids, the days take forever, but the years fly by.”
– Andrew Redleaf
“Balance is the key to life and having curiosity about the world is the key to success and longevity.”
– Bill Spitz
“Time is the most fleeting of all assets. You should spend it on things that you really enjoy and where you’re
the most productive.”
– Brett Barth

-- 83 of 96 --

T
Chapter 13: The Top 10
he lessons imparted by guests in this book came from 150 conversations on the podcast.
These conversations together were approximately 150 hours long and cover 3,500 pages of transcripts.
To whittle down that work, Christopher Seifel initiated a process of outlining each conversation in a series of 25–40
quotes. His efforts, alongside invaluable contributions from Victoria Sienczewski, Marc Anani-Isaac, and Mike
Dariano, prepared me to write this book.
From those outlines, I curated the best quotes from each episode. That process resulted in a list of 856 quotes that
is available as a gift to anyone who signs up for our free monthly mailing list (capitalallocators.com).
As a closing to this book, I have picked a top 10 list from among those 856 quotes. The criteria are entirely
subjective – each quote struck me as special when I heard it, for its wisdom, humor, or both.
Here it is: the top 10 quotes from 150 episodes of the Capital Allocators podcast.
1. “Anyone who thinks nothing lasts forever has never invested in a bad private equity fund.”
– Karl Scheer
2. “My new favorite bias is the bias-bias. People are now talking about behavioral finance so much, they are
biased to find a bias.”
– Drew Dickson
3. “I wake up every morning saying a prayer that I’m going to pay the most in fees this year that I’ve ever
paid.”
– Jon Harris
4. “One day I got a box with one red Louis Vuitton stiletto. The note said I got my foot in the door, can I come
get my shoe?”
– Jim Dunn
5. “Manager skill is rare. It’s really hard to identify in advance. Sometimes it’s hard to identify after the fact.”
– Matt Whineray
6. “Investors want to be different and the same.”
– Margaret Chen
7. “In order to finish first, you first have to finish.”
– Andy Golden
8. “One guy came and pitched me the idea of the endowment buying a cow. A single cow. I said, ‘Sir, you do
realize I can’t buy a cow.’ He went away very sad.”
– Ellen Ellison
9. “Your risk tolerance has to be the lesser of your own risk tolerance or the asset owner’s.”
– David Druley
10. “Emphasize the reflective over the reactive.”
– James Aitken

-- 84 of 96 --

Appendices

-- 85 of 96 --

Appendix A: Initial Manager Meeting Outline
The following outline is an example of a preparation document for a meeting with a long-short equity hedge fund
manager. It lists the topics intended for discussion without specific questions.
Background
Origins
Team
Ownership and compensation
GP commitment
Investment approach
Philosophy
Strategy
Opportunity
Return/risk profile
Process
Idea generation
Analysis
Qualitative (company visits, calls)
Quantitative (models)
Write-ups
Decision-making
Monitoring
Portfolio construction
Hedging
Portfolio characteristics
Exposure (max, avg)
Positions (# long, short)
Largest position (cost, market)
Avg position (cost, market)
Top 10 concentration
Factor concentration
Liquidity
Turnover
Business
Goals
Team
Anticipated changes
Historical turnover
Past employees
Strategic/financial relationships
Clients
Composition
Special arrangements
Reporting
Terms
Fees
Lockup
Contributions
Withdrawals
Service providers
Investment case
Typical day
Examples

-- 86 of 96 --

Successful investment
Unsuccessful investment
Current environment
Favorite idea
Lessons
Learned from mistakes
Best performance period
Worst period
Initial meeting question list
The question list is a sample reference document for allocators to consider before entering the meeting. Bringing
the list into the meeting risks getting anchored to the specific questions and distracted from the dialogue.
I. People
A. Origins of business
What is your story?
How did life circumstances shape the principals?
What is the story behind the fund name?
B. Team
How is the team and strategy built?
How does the team interact?
What norms are celebrated?
Where have you experienced personnel turnover?
Who would be your ideal partner on the team that you can’t hire today?
What skills would best augment the team?
C. Incentives
Who owns the management company?
How will ownership change over time?
How is the team compensated?
How much have you personally invested in the fund?
Where is your money invested outside of the fund?
What percentage of your net worth is in the business?
What investment have employees (non-GP) made in the funds?
D. Personal
What do you want to accomplish?
What do you fear?
What was your biggest failure?
What is your superpower?
Where do you need to improve?
What do you do in your free time?
II. Investment philosophy
A. Definition
What do you believe about investing?
What is your edge?
B. Investment strategy
Why does the strategy work?
What aspects of the strategy are not replicable by others?
What would indicate your edge no longer endures?
III. Investment process
A. Typical day

-- 87 of 96 --

What do you do when you first wake up?
When do you arrive in the office?
What reports do you review?
What meetings do you have?
How do you prioritize your schedule?
Who do you talk to routinely?
What do you do during downtime?
B. Life of an investment idea
Idea generation: Where do ideas arise?
Analysis: What makes a fully baked idea? Models? Write-ups? Reviews?
Decision-making: What is your decision-making process?
Portfolio construction: How do you size positions?
Monitoring: What do they watch? What triggers action?
Selling: How do you decide when to sell a position?
How much time do you spend on each aspect of the process?
When did you last improve your process?
How do you step back from the day-to-day and evaluate your process?
C. Application of theory
What is an emblematic example in your current portfolio?
What position is most outside of your stated process?
What is your favorite idea today?
What position are you most unsure of today?
What is the current market environment for the strategy?
What was an example of a mistake? How did you address it?
What lessons have you learned from mistakes?
What do you do differently to avoid the same mistakes?
How do you minimize bias?
D. Risk management
How do you define risk?
What disciplines/controls do you have in place?
Risk measurement
What reports do you use?
How frequently do you review them?
What off-the-shelf tools do you use?
What customized tools do you use?
Risk management
Who acts on it?
What constitutes a change in the portfolio?
What can break down?
IV. Investment product
A. Portfolio characteristics
How many positions in the book? Longs? Shorts?
What is the average position size (at cost, at market)?
What is the maximum size (at cost, at market)?
What is the minimum size (at cost, at market)?
What are your factor biases?
B. Expectations
What are your return goals?
What would an expected, difficult performance period look like?
What are your capacity constraints?
C. Landscape
Which competitors do you respect the most?
Where are you better than those competitors?

-- 88 of 96 --

D. Track record
How does trading impact their performance?
How much is skill (alpha) compared to luck (beta)?

-- 89 of 96 --

Appendix B: To Learn More
The following is a compilation of the recommendations at the end of each chapter.
Interviewing
Podcasts
The Tim Ferriss Show: The Interview Master: Cal Fussman and the Power of Listening (Ep.145)
Invest Like the Best: The Ace of Spades, with Eric Maddox (Ep.15)
Books
Getting the Love You Want, Harville Hendrix
Decision-making
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Annie Duke – Improving Decision-Making (Ep.39)
Capital Allocators: Annie Duke – How to Decide (Ep.156)
Capital Allocators: Gary Klein with Paul Johnson and Paul Sonkin – Conducting Pre-Mortem Analysis (Ep.109)
Capital Allocators: Michael Mauboussin – Active Challenges, Rational Decisions and Team Dynamics (Ep.36)
Books
Thinking, Fast and Slow, Daniel Kahneman
Thinking in Bets, Annie Duke
How to Decide, Annie Duke
Negotiations
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Daylian Cain – Master Class in Negotiations (Ep.138)
The Knowledge Project: Chris Voss – The Art of Letting Other People Have Your Way (Ep.27)
Online Course
Negotiation Mind Games, Daylian Cain, www.negotiationmindgames.com.
Books
Never Split the Difference, Chris Voss
Leadership
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Jennifer Prosek – Branding an Asset Management Firm (Ep.81)
Capital Allocators: Randall Stutman – Admired Leadership (Ep.150)
Online course
Admired Leadership, Randall Stutman and the Admired Leadership team
Randall and his team discuss 100 universal behaviors of admired leaders that they uncovered in their work. It is
the best, most actionable set of tools I have come across. Available at www.admiredleadership.com.
Books
The Ride of a Lifetime, Bob Iger
Army of Entrepreneurs, Jennifer Prosek

-- 90 of 96 --

It is a folly for me to try to recommend leadership books. Instead, I have shared two that struck me as being true to
the lessons in this chapter.
Management
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: David “Bull” Gurfein – Interdisciplinary Lessons from the Marines (Ep.10)
Books
How to Win Friends and Influence People, Dale Carnegie
Take your pick. There are libraries full of management books. I picked this one because it had the most influence
on me. I resisted reading Carnegie’s classic for years because of the title. It may be the only book I read more than
twice.
Governance
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Steve Galbraith – In the Boardroom (Ep.48)
White Papers
Best Governance Practices for Investment Committees, Greenwich Roundtable49
Principles of Investment Stewardship for Nonprofit Organizations, Commonfund Institute50
Investment strategy
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Jon Hirtle – The Pioneer of OCIO (Ep.98)
Capital Allocators: Matt Whineray – Innovation at New Zealand Super Fund (Ep.108)
Books
Pioneering Portfolio Management, David Swensen
Investment process
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Scott Malpass – The Fighting Irish’s Twelfth Man (Ep.25)
Capital Allocators: Kim Lew – The Carnegie Way (Ep.52)
Capital Allocators: Andrew Golden – Princeton University’s Chief Investing Tiger (Ep.13)
Every CIO on the show adds value thinking about the investment process. I could not pick among them, so I didn’t.
Scott, Kim and Andy’s conversations are your picks – the most downloaded shows among the CIO interviews.
Data analysis
Podcasts
Capital Allocators: Patrick O’Shaughnessy – O’Shaughnessy Asst Management (First Meeting, Ep.1)
Capital Allocators: Jordi Visser – Next Generation of Manager Allocators (Ep.92)
Capital Allocators: Matthew Granade – Inside Data Science at Point72 (First Meeting, Ep.22)
Companies
Novus Partners, www.novus.com
Essentia Analytics, www.essentia-analytics.com
Alpha Theory, www.alphatheory.com
Reading won’t help much in improving investment results through quantitative means. Instead, reach out to
Novus, Essentia, and Alpha Theory to learn more about their application of tools for allocators and portfolio

-- 91 of 96 --

managers.
49. Available at: greenwichroundtable.org/system/files/GR-BP-Governance.pdf
50. Available at: info.commonfund.org/investment-management-for-nonprofit-investors

-- 92 of 96 --

Appendix C: Directory of Guests on Capital
Allocators
Chris Acito, Founder and CIO, Gapstow Capital Partners
Daniel Adamson, Senior Managing Director, Wafra and President, Capital Constellation
Chris Ailman, CIO, CalSTRS
James Aitken, Aitken Advisors
Dan Ariely, Behavioral Economist and Founding Partner, Irrational Capital
Raphael Arndt, CEO, Australia Future Fund
David Barrett, Founder, David Barrett Partners
Brett Barth, Founder and Co-CEO, BBR Partners
Michael Batnick, Director of Research, Ritholtz Wealth Management
Mark Baumgartner, CIO, Institute for Advanced Study
Brent Beshore, Founder and CEO, Permanent Equity
Ron Biscardi, Founder and CEO, iConnections
Paul Black, Portfolio Manager and Co-CEO, WCM Investment Management
Adam Blitz, CEO and CIO, Evanston Capital Management
Matt Botein, Co-Founder and Managing Partner, Gallatin Point Capital
André Bourbonnais, Managing Director, Blackrock
Chris Brockmeyer, Director of Employee Benefit Funds, Broadway League
Josh Brown, CEO, Ritholz Wealth Management
Tom Bushey, Founder and CIO, Sunderland Capital
Daylian Cain, Senior Lecturer in Negotiations, Yale University School of Management
Michael Cembalest, Chairman of Market and Investment Strategy, J.P. Morgan Asset and Wealth Management
Margaret Chen, Global Head of Endowment & Foundation Practice, Cambridge Associates
Beezer Clarkson, Managing Director, Sapphire Ventures
Thomas DeLong, Baker Foundation Professor of Management Practice, Harvard Business School
Drew Dickson, Founder and CIO, Albert Bridge Capital
Chris Douvos, Founder and Managing Director, Ahoy Capital
David Druley, CEO, Cambridge Associates
Annie Duke, Former Professional Poker Player, Best-Selling Author, and Decision Strategist
Jim Dunn, CEO and CIO, Verger Capital Management
Dan Egan, Managing Director of Behavioral Finance and Investing, Betterment
Charley Ellis, Founder, Greenwich Associates
Ellen Ellison, CIO, University of Illinois Foundation
Dawn Fitzpatrick, CIO, Soros Fund Management
Gregory Fleming, President & CEO, Rockefeller Capital Management
Kristian Fok, CIO, Cbus Superannuation Fund
Ash Fontana, Managing Director, Zetta Ventures
Manny Friedman, CEO and Co-CIO, EJF Capital
Clarke Futch, Co-Founder and Managing Partner, HealthCare Royalty Partners
Steven Galbraith, Managing Member, Kindred Capital and Chairman of Investment Committee, Tufts University
Jay Girotto, Founder, Farmland Opportunity
Andrew Golden, CIO, Princeton University Investment Management Company (PRINCO)
Matthew Granade, Chief Market Intelligence Officer, Point72
David Gurfein, Decorated Marine Veteran and CEO, United American Patriots
Ali Hamed, Co-Founder and Partner, CoVenture
Christie Hamilton, Head of Investments, Children’s Health of Dallas
Jon Harris, CEO, Alternative Investment Management
Jenny Heller, President and CIO, Brandywine Group Advisors
Roz Hewsenian, CIO, Helmsley Charitable Trust
Cameron Hight, Founder and CEO, Alpha Theory
Jon Hirtle, Executive Chairman, Hirtle, Callaghan & Co.
Morgan Housel, Partner at Collaborative Fund and Best-Selling Author
Khe Hy, Founder, RadReads

-- 93 of 96 --

Jean Hynes, Managing Partner, Wellington Management
Ben Inker, Head of Asset Allocation, GMO
Ross Israel, Head of Global Infrastructure, QIC
Brett Jefferson, Founder and Co-CIO, Hildene Capital Management
Meredith Jenkins, CIO, Trinity Wall Street
Paul Johnson, Founder, Nicusa Investment Advisors
Jason Karp, Founder and CEO, HumanCo
Gary Klein, Cognitive Psychologist
Jason Klein, CIO, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
Larry Kochard, CIO, Makena Capital Management
Peter Kraus, Chairman and CEO, Aperture Investors
Steve Kuhn, Retired Hedge Fund Manager
Scott Kupor, CEO, Andreessen Horowitz
Richard Lawrence, Founder and Executive Chairman, Overlook Investments Group
Thomas Lenehan, CIO, Wallace Foundation
Matt Levine, Bloomberg Opinion Columnist
Clare Flynn Levy, Founder and CEO, Essentia Analytics
Kim Lew, CIO, Carnegie Corporation
Michael Lombardi, Former NFL Executive
Joe Lonsdale, Founding Partner, 8VC
Tom Lydon, Founder and CEO, ETF Trends
Scott Malpass, Retired CEO, University of Notre Dame Endowment
Ana Marshall, CIO, William and Flora Hewlett Foundation
Anne Martin, CIO, Wesleyan University
Seth Masters, Retired CIO, AllianceBernstein
Michael Mauboussin, Head of Consilient Research, Counterpoint Global
Mike Mauzé, Partner, VMG Partners
Tim McCusker, CIO, NEPC
Kip McDaniel, Editor-in-Chief, Institutional Investor
Stephen McKeon, Associate Professor of Finance, University of Oregon
Michael Mervosh, Clinical Psychologist and Founder, Hero’s Journey Foundation
Larry Mestel, Founder and Co-CEO, Primary Wave
Hiro Mizuno, Former CIO, Government of Japan Investment Fund (GPIF)
Ashby Monk, Executive Director, Global Projects Center, Stanford University
Rahul Moodgal, Partner, Parvus Asset Management
Steve Nelson, CEO, ILPA
Michael Novogratz, Founder and CEO, Galaxy Digital
Patrick O’Shaughnessy, CEO, O’Shaughnessy Asset Management
André Perold, Founder and CIO, HighVista Strategies
Eric Peters, Founder and CIO, One River Asset Management
John Pfeffer, Co-Founder, Pfeffer Capital
Doug Phillips, CIO, University of Rochester Endowment
Brian Portnoy, Author and Founder, Shaping Wealth
Jennifer Prosek, Managing Partner, Prosek Partners
Basil Qunibi, Founder and Chairman, Novus Partners
Paul Rabil, Co-Founder, Premier Lacrosse League
Dan Rasmussen, Founder and Portfolio Manager, Verdad Capital
Steve Rattner, Chairman, Willett Advisors
Tim Recker, CIO, James Irvine Foundation
Andy Redleaf, Founder and Retired CEO, Whitebox Advisors
Ben Reiter, Senior Writer, Sports Illustrated
Eric Ries, Founder and CEO, LTSE
Sandra Robertson, CEO and CIO, Oxford University Endowment Management
Thomas Russo, Managing Member, Gardner Russo & Gardner
Anthony Scaramucci, Founder and co-Managing Partner, Skybridge Capital
Karl Scheer, CIO, University of Cincinnati Endowment
Dan Schorr, Founder, Vice Cream

-- 94 of 96 --

Michael Schwimer, CEO, Big League Advance
Rick Selvala, Co-Founder and CEO, Harvest Volatility
Tali Sharot, Professor of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London
Sam Sicilia, CIO, Hostplus
Laurence Siegel, Director of Research, CFA Institute Research Foundation
Chatri Sityodtong, Founder and Chairman, ONE Championship
Donna Snider, CIO, Hackensack Meridian Health
Jeffrey Solomon, CEO, Cowen Group
Paul Sonkin, Former Portfolio Manager, GAMCO Investors/Gabelli Funds
Bill Spitz, Founder and Principal, Diversified Trust
Randall Stutman, Founder, Admired Leadership
Jonathan Tepper, Founder and CIO, Prevatt Capital
Mario Therrien, Head of Investment Funds and External Management, Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec
Neal Triplett, CIO, DUMAC
Peter Troob, CIO, Troob Capital Management
Andrew Tsai, Founder and Chairman, Chalkstream Capital
Jordi Visser, CIO, Weiss Multi-Strategy Advisers
Sarel Vorster, Neurosurgeon, Cleveland Clinic
Jon Wertheim, Author and Journalist, Sports Illustrated and 60 Minutes
Matt Whineray, CEO, New Zealand Super Fund
Martin Whittaker, CEO, Just Capital
Wayne Wicker, CIO, ICMA Retirement Corporation
Ash Williams, CIO, Florida State Board of Administration
James Williams, CIO, J. Paul Getty Trust
Sarah Williamson, CEO, FCLT Global
Scott Wilson, CIO, Washington University of St. Louis
Josh Wolfe, Co-Founder and Managing Partner, Lux Capital
David Zorub, Founder and CIO, Parsifal Capital
Greg Zuckerman, Author and Journalist, Wall Street Journal

-- 95 of 96 --

Publishing details
HARRIMAN HOUSE LTD
3 Viceroy Court
Bedford Road
Petersfield
Hampshire
GU32 3LJ
GREAT BRITAIN
Tel: +44 (0)1730 233870
Email: enquiries@harriman-house.com
Website: harriman.house
First published in 2021.
Copyright © Ted Seides
The right of Ted Seides to be identified as the Authors has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Design and Patents Act 1988.
Hardback ISBN: 978-0-85719-886-0
eBook ISBN: 978-0-85719-887-7
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book can be obtained from the British Library.
All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the prior written permission of the Publisher. This book may not be lent,
resold, hired out or otherwise disposed of by way of trade in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published without the
prior written consent of the Publisher.
Whilst every effort has been made to ensure that information in this book is accurate, no liability can be accepted for any loss incurred in any
way whatsoever by any person relying solely on the information contained herein.
No responsibility for loss occasioned to any person or corporate body acting or refraining to act as a result of reading material in this book can
be accepted by the Publisher, by the Authors or the Contributors, or by the employers of the Authors or the Contributors.

-- 96 of 96 --

