

-- 1 of 546 --



-- 2 of 546 --

SECOND EDITION
80+ Customer Ratings on Amazon with over 50 Five-Star
reviews
“The Business of Venture Capital is a comprehensive book with
data, industry trends, and insights from leading VCs and LPs –
a must have for practitioners.”
—David York, Managing Director, Top Tier Capital Partners,
a Fund-of-Funds with over $2 billion under management
“Whether you are a practitioner or a student of the venture
capital industry, this book offers innumerable insights into the
art of the deal.”
—Scott Kupor, Managing Partner, Andreessen Horowitz
“A valuable resource for beginners and experts alike, The
Business of Venture Capital addresses the complexities and chal-
lenges of being a successful venture capitalist.”
—Michael Kim, Managing Partner, Cendana Capital, a next
generation Fund-of-Funds
“Mahendra’s research into today’s most active investors
reveals how the Venture Capital model is evolving. It’s the
closest book I’ve found to a User’s Manual for VCs.”
—David Cowan, Bessemer Venture Partners
“Combines concrete examples and deep insights of industry
leaders – a must-have for any venture investor or practitioner.”
—Karim Faris, General Partner, Google Ventures
“Mahendra demonstrates how skill, discipline, and often luck
and intuition can help to create successful venture capitalists.
This is engaging and enjoyable.”
—Jon Callaghan, True Ventures

-- 3 of 546 --

“Detailed yet accessible description of the many facets of ven-
ture capital – from the nuanced considerations of LPs to the
intricate 	mechanics 	of 	the 	entrepreneurial 	companies
they bet on.”
—Amish Jani, Founder and Managing Director,
FirstMark Capital
FIRST EDITION
“If you read only one guide to becoming a successful VC, this
is the one to read.”
—Paul Maeder, Chairman, National Venture Capital
Association (NVCA)
“Captures the LP mindset succinctly – any GP or aspiring VC
can benefit from this book.”
—Timothy Recker, Chairman, Institutional Limited Partners
Association (ILPA)
“... packs the insights and wisdom of those who have done it,
not once but multiple times.”
—Frank Caufield, cofounder, Kleiner Perkins
Caufield and Byers
“An immensely useful and comprehensive guide.”
—Mark Florman, CEO, British Venture Capital
Association (BVCA)

-- 4 of 546 --

The Business of Venture
Capital

-- 5 of 546 --

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent
publishing company in the United States. With offices in North
America, Europe, Australia, and Asia, Wiley is globally com-
mitted to developing and marketing print and electronic prod-
ucts and services for our customers’ professional and personal
knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Finance series contains books written specifically
for finance and investment professionals as well as sophisti-
cated individual investors and their financial advisors. Book
topics range from portfolio management to e-commerce, risk
management, financial engineering, valuation and financial
instrument analysis, as well as much more.
For 	a 	list 	of 	available 	titles, 	visit 	our 	Web 	site 	at
www.WileyFinance.com.

-- 6 of 546 --

THE BUSINESS
of 	VENTURE
CAPITAL
THE ART of RAISING
a FUND, STRUCTURING
INVESTMENTS, PORTFOLIO
MANAGEMENT, and EXITS
THIRD EDITION
Mahendra Ramsinghani

-- 7 of 546 --

Copyright © 2021 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scan-
ning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authoriza-
tion through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center,
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the
Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed
to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken,
NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used
their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties
with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifi-
cally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular
purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written
sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for
your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial dam-
ages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support,
please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-
2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993, or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand.
Some material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in
e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is
not included in the version you purchased, you may download this material at http://
booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Ramsinghani, Mahendra, author.
Title: The business of venture capital : the art of raising a fund,
structuring investments, portfolio management, and exits / Mahendra
Ramsinghani.
Description: Third edition. | Hoboken, New Jersey : John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., [2021] | Series: Wiley finance series | Includes bibliographical
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020030565 (print) | LCCN 2020030566 (ebook) | ISBN
9781119639688 (hardback) | ISBN 9781119639718 (adobe pdf) | ISBN
9781119639701 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Venture capital.
Classification: LCC HG4751 .R36 2020 (print) | LCC HG4751 (ebook) | DDC
332/.04154068–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020030565
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020030566
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © piranka/Getty Images
Author Photo: Courtesy of Mahendra Ramsinghani
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

-- 8 of 546 --

In the memory of my parents,
who reminded me to put
knowledge above wealth,
people above profits,
truth above power,
and service above self
For Amar and Geeta, who gave me wings
&
for Deepa and Aria, who bring the light and the song

-- 9 of 546 --



-- 10 of 546 --

ix
Contents
Foreword 	xiii
Preface 	xv
Acknowledgments 	xxvii
Part One 	The Making of a VC
1 	The Business of Cash and Carry 	3
2 	Why Choose a Career in VC 	11
3 	Attributes of Successful VCs 	15
4 	Welcome to the Land of Ad-Venture 	21
5 	Developing Your Investment Career 	41
6 	A Business Where Enemies Accumulate 	57
7 	Generational Transfer and Succession 	63
Part Two 	Raising Your Venture Fund
8 	LP Universe 	73
9 	LPs of Choice: Fund of Funds 	89
10 	How LPs Conduct Fund Due Diligence 	95
11 	Defining Your Fund’s Investment Strategy 	99
12 	Investment Team Diligence 	119

-- 11 of 546 --

x 	Contents
13 	Fund Size and Portfolio Construction 	129
14 	Performance Analysis 	137
15 	Terms of Fund Investment 	155
16 	The Venture Firm’s Ethos, Culture, and
Values 	173
17 	Raising Your First Fund 	193
18 	The Fundraising Roadshow 	205
19 	Why LPs Seek First-Time Funds 	221
20 	Sourcing Investment Opportunities 	229
Part Three 	Building Your Portfolio
21 	Due Diligence Cheat Sheet 	255
22 	Diligence 	259
23 	Management Team Diligence: Assessing
the Intangible 	269
24 	Market, Product, and Business Model
Analysis 	293
25 	Terms and Conditions Apply 	303
26 	Structure of the Term Sheet 	309
27 	Buy Low, Sell High 	317
28 	The Closing Process 	353
Part Four 	The Art of Value Creation
29 	Serving on Boards 	357
30 	Board Culture and Orientation 	367
31 	Let Me Know How I Can Be Helpful:
Value Creation 	377
32 	Challenges in the Boardroom 	391

-- 12 of 546 --

Contents 	xi
Part Five 	Exits: Liquidity Events and Champagne
33 	Exit Strategies 	407
34 	Acquisitions 	417
35 	Initial Public Offering 	435
36 	Secondary Sales 	449
Notes 	451
Index 	485

-- 13 of 546 --



-- 14 of 546 --

xiii
Foreword
Now in its third edition, The Business of Venture Capital builds
on the foundational best practices in venture investments,
offering new, valuable tools along with some wit and wisdom.
The scope of the venture capital business is wide, and often
opaque. For example, how do our investors (limited partners or
LPs) make decisions? What challenges do they encounter, and
how should a general partner (GP) understand their universe?
How can a practitioner build a “point of view” on the market,
identify emerging trends, compete to win the best opportu-
nities, and nurture them to success? What biases and cognitive
traps spring up in our business? How should we think prob-
abilistically? What skills are critical to our business, and how
does one develop such skills? Which parts of our business are
at the mercy of the markets?
In this book, you will find answers to many of these ques-
tions. But, as with any good book, it will leave you thinking
about many other questions. You'll ultimately need to figure
out how to apply many of the mental models about which
Mahendra writes to your own situation.
Over the past decade, Mahendra has had to answer many
of these questions, both as an investor and a practitioner. When
the first edition was released nearly a decade ago, there was no
book on VC and the blogosphere was just in its infancy. So, he
heeded Nobel Prize winner Toni Morrison's advice: “If there's
a book that you want to read, but it hasn't been written yet,
then you must write it.”

-- 15 of 546 --

xiv 	Foreword
This book includes views of over 50 leading LPs and GPs,
compiled in a jargon-free, digestible format to benefit all those
exploring VC as a path, whether you're a solo-GP getting ready
to raise a fund or a venture partner on your first board.
This book covers the arc of investment and blends lessons
from Silicon Valley as well as other parts of the country. Over
the past decade, much has evolved — the amount of capital
flowing in venture has increased tenfold by some estimates.
Besides mainstream LPs, hedge funds, sovereign wealth funds,
and corporate VC funds have helped shape this growth trajec-
tory. At the same time, the presence of new and large players,
including Softbank, have impacted the nature of the venture
business overall.
Indeed, our business is changing rapidly and, with it, we
continue to evolve. But our singular goal remains the same —
to help entrepreneurs in their journey to build important and
lasting businesses, along the way generating superior returns
for our investors. It is my hope that this book will not only set
the foundation for you but make a meaningful impact in your
journey as a practitioner.
Scott Kupor
Author, Secrets of Sand Hill Road: Venture Capital and
How to Get It
Managing Partner, Andreessen Horowitz (A16Z)
Former Chair, National Venture Capital Association
(2017–2018)

-- 16 of 546 --

xv
Preface
WHY SHOULD YOU READ THIS BOOK?
Thank you, dear reader, for arriving at the doorsteps of this
somewhat lengthy tome. I hope you reached here, at the doors
of this career after some thought and planning, unlike me, who
stumbled in the VC wormhole and got sucked in 20 years ago.
Do you really need a big, fat, expensive book on venture
capital, when a thousand blogs can give you answers instanta-
neously? Surely, in this day and age of free content, why would
you want to pay an ungodly amount to buy a book? And who
has time to read these days?
And you must surely know, no book will teach you how
to be a great investor — you have to get out there and start
investing. Like learning to ride a bicycle. A book can only do
so much. The learning comes from doing.
But what is the best way to become a good investor — to
build a structured approach, to build your foundation, and to
build a strong core? Maybe this book can help. The business of
venture capital not only presents basic principles, checklists,
and frameworks, but also shares philosophies and wisdom of
the ages. At its very core, an investor has the ability to under-
stand risk and then make a probabilistic bet against that risk.
We do this to achieve outstanding “venture-like” returns, well
above some other asset classes.
On the face of it, the business sounds easy. I mean — how
hard can this be? As they say, any fool can write a check.
Everybody knows the obvious of investing: “Buy low, sell

-- 17 of 546 --

xvi 	PREfAcE
high.” But how many can do it consistently across macroeco-
nomic changes, with evolving technology cycles, competitive
landscape, regulatory dynamics, and management teams?
The sands of time keep shifting. Entropy prevails. All that is
valuable is being eroded by the new waves. Your role as an
investor is to make sure you can stay balanced, find music in
this cacophony, and find the right signal.
In public equities, trading strategies include a “momentum”
driven approach. You invest in a stock that has a high level of
buy–sell activity. This momentum drives the price. In a frenzy,
everyone jumps in and the price starts to go up, but very few
pause to step away from the herd. To ask, “Why is this hap-
pening?” is not the mind-set of the momentum investor. They
are well trained to make several short trades and know when
to get in, when to get out. The “value” investor — someone
like Warren Buffett — studies the company's financials, its
value proposition, the ins and outs of the sector, competition,
product pricing, defensible moats, and more. The intellectual
effort for understanding value is much more different and
strenuous than the herd mentality momentum-based trade.
Bear in mind that we are not here to make moral judgments
against momentum trades nor demonstrate superiority of any
kind — we are merely choosing a path, based on our strengths
to get to a destination. I was a herd trader, too, until I could
develop my own muscles and confidence. Success can come
from many paths, and you have to choose what works best
for you. I have tried both approaches and can tell you one is
far easier than the other, but the rewards of a well-planned
strategy are immensely gratifying — both intellectually and
financially. It is like a game of chess — only in this case, you
have n number of opponents.
One of the primary goals of this book is to help you to build
the muscle — manage risk effectively, shield yourself from all
the biases, and get to the promised land.
The second goal is a bit more subtle — what kind of a person
will you become in this journey? As a venture capitalist, we are
not just trading stock — we work with people. That indomi-
table human spirit in founders comes to you. They bring their

-- 18 of 546 --

PREfAcE 	xvii
dreams, their life-time aspirations — if we cannot look beyond
their fancy PowerPoint decks, we are to blame. Those dreams
are a part of this package. If we only chase financial outcomes,
are we being short-sighted and self-serving? Wall Street may
choose to operate that way, not Sand Hill Road. Not venture.
A typical VC interacts with the portfolio founder multiple
times a week — a Wall Street trader may never know the name
of the management team members. We become intimately
aware of the founder's day-to-day dilemmas and their sleep-
less nights, their joys, sorrows, anxiety, and depression — all
of these come with this package as well. So the next time you
make an investment, remember that you are not just making a
trade — you are putting on fertilizer to help sprout the founder's
dreams. Of such dreams will come a better tomorrow. If there
is a gale storm in the middle of the night, you better get out of
bed and get out there. Do your best to protect those saplings.
And this business will not disappoint — you will find
the best and worst of human behaviors when you make (or
lose) big money. Because there are two primal drivers — those
imposters called greed and fear. This business brings all the
highs and lows of these two demons. Dysfunctions within
venture funds, their founding teams, CEO desire for global
dominance, street fights with competition, slick maneuvers,
politics, ego, drama — you name it, and this business has it
all. Not getting caught up in this theater and still staying true
to yourself can be a challenge. I could share some great stories
of power, greed, backstabbing, and more, but I will save the
gossip and entertainment for People magazine. My goal was to
bring out the best of this business and leave the reader empow-
ered and inspired. To stay persistent and focused over the long
haul despite all these primal challenges requires some tenacity.
How do you build a fair and balanced core in your ethos, your
DNA, and your daily persona?
Until our portfolio company becomes an enduring mile-
stone, we must fight their fight with every inch of our lives,
blood, sweat, and soul. Our work is done not when we make
great returns but only when we help fulfill the dreams of
founders. To forget this basic rule of venture investments

-- 19 of 546 --

xviii 	PREfAcE
is to forget our purpose. For it is not our goal to mindlessly
multiply small pieces of green paper and proclaim Midas list
ranks on our resume — that is a fool's errand for those who,
while getting rich, leave behind a trail of carcasses of broken
dreams. We are here to help those dreams come one step closer
to reality. We are here for empowering the crazy ones with our
gifts of time, money, intellectual insights, and our wonderful
relationships. All of this to serve for the greater good of society.
That should be our singular goal.
To find the founder whose vision is to serve for the most
good of the society is not an easy task. In the beginning, all
founders sound alike — their mission statements filled with
zeal and passion. They serve up PowerPoints to our demand
for “billion-dollar” markets. It is your job to dissect the frothy
shapeshifters from the authentic forces of good. How do you
make value judgments when faced with the promise of fantastic
returns? Juul — the e-cigarette vaping company — grew the
fastest in recent years, raised the most amount, and can gen-
erate the best returns for their portfolio. But if you were to make
a lesser return in another company, say one that's addressing
cancer, would that align with your values? Would your limited
partners (LPs) be happy? Would you be satisfied with the tra-
jectory of your career?
Indeed, “values over valuation” has been one of our
larger business challenges — if we chase the promise of
an IPO and triple-digit IRR but damage the socioeconomic
fabric, where do we draw the line? I know one prominent
investor who chooses to not use the portfolio company's
technology for defense markets. The CEO was blunt — our
technology can kill a lot of people, but we will never sell it for that
purpose. The company would be valued at least 10 times more
if it went down that path, but its bedrock values keep it on
course, staving off the monkeys of greed. If you do not estab-
lish the foundation of values, you could make money, lots of
it — but then you might feel purposeless, adrift in the sea of
capitalism.
What set of values will become your internal compass
to help you make the right decisions when you stand at the

-- 20 of 546 --

PREfAcE 	xix
tougher crossroads of our business? As you build a framework
of values, this work is like a journey, best illustrated by C. P.
Cavafy's poem “Ithaka”:1
Better if it lasts for years,
so you're old by the time you reach the island,
wealthy with all you've gained on the way,
And we are here only for a short while, even though VCs
are desperately trying to solve for death.
Come now, you who say, “Today or tomorrow we will go into such
and such a town and spend a year there
and trade and make a profit” —
yet you do not know what tomorrow will bring.
What is your life?
For you are a mist that appears for a little time and then vanishes.2
So 	this 	book 	weaves 	in 	lessons 	from 	these 	three
areas — managing risk, service to founders, and above all,
developing a framework of values.
AND WHO AM I TO WRITE THIS BOOK?
There are no experts (nor will there ever be) in the world of
venture capital. It's like the list of top Hollywood stars or top-
performing mutual funds — each year, you have someone new
at the top. In this constant churn, we are all learning this craft,
and apprenticeship is the name of this daily practice. Those at
the top are humbled by the forces of the unknown: risk and
uncertainty. In recent times, their own arrogance and exploit-
ative behavior have brought their downfall. And those at the
bottom of the pyramid are striving — a combination of luck,
some skill, huge networks, and the advantages of market tim-
ing lift them up.
Jorge Luis Borges wrote, “I am all the writers that I have
read, all the people that I have met, all the women that I have

-- 21 of 546 --

xx 	PREfAcE
loved; all the cities that I have visited, all my ancestors.”3 With
all that and more, being a storyteller at heart, exposure to this
business makes it easier for me to share the lessons. Having
tasted all three layers of the founder-GP-LP cake as a practi-
tioner in Silicon Valley and having invested in over a hundred
companies over the past decade, I have made a lot, lost a lot,
and learned a lot. These lessons, some very expensive ones, are
offered in this book. In my quest to learn the nuances of this
business, I have compiled insights of proven investors from
firms like A16Z, Benchmark, First Round, the Foundry Group,
True Ventures, Sequoia Capital, and Union Square Ventures,
to name a few. I have also woven these with the wisdom of
investment giants like Warren Buffett, Charlie Munger, and
Nicholas Nassem Taleb because their observations can be
applied to most parts of our business and life. And finally, I
sprinkled in some wisdom from philosophers and Nobel Lau-
reates (like Bob Dylan).
Having co-invested with some of the best-in-class, and
occasionally with the pseudo-intellectuals, opportunists,
and carpetbaggers, you experience the people problem in our
business. You never know the true nature of a person until you
reach the extremes of success or failure. Big exits drive greed.
Failure gets everyone scampering away. Blame is pinned on
some macro-event, China, or circumstance. Amidst these
roller-coaster rides, I learned two things well: (a) how to avoid
the self-serving and the greedy and (b) where I could not avoid,
I mastered the art of projectile vomiting.
As Rudyard Kipling wrote in his poem, “If”:4
If you can make one heap of all your winnings
And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss,
And lose, and start again at your beginnings
And never breathe a word about your loss. . .
Yup, I've experienced a bit of that. So those are some good
reasons why I'm qualified to write such a book.
If you feel the ROI on this book has not been to your high
expectations, dear reader, I am sorry I have wasted your time

-- 22 of 546 --

PREfAcE 	xxi
with this rambling repository of riffs, anecdotes, and gener-
ally available kitschy stuff. And yes, I'm happy to refund you
a full amount. Or make a donation to a charity of your choice.
For all others who get featured on that Forbes Midas List after
reading a page or two of this book, do feel free to send me a few
points of that carry. I'm saving up to buy a winery in Hawaii
as I approach my retirement years. Aloha to health, happiness,
harmony, peace, abundance, and carry.
WHAT SHOULD YOU KNOW ABOUT THIS BUSINESS
Of VENTURE cAPITAL?
It's not as easy as it looks. And not as hard as you might think
it is. But I'm sure you expect a bit more than that. So here are
seven pointers:
1. The VC business is changing, growing, and even matur-
ing a bit. There are over a thousand VC firms manag-
ing about $400 billion in assets under management
(AUM). This has doubled in the past decade, which is
a good thing. Money is flowing in this asset class, and
our business is about deal flow and cash flow — and
with LPs pouring in the cash, VCs can continue to
make investments. In any given year, 200+ funds raise
their capital, and the average fund size raised is now at
$200+ million. The largest VC fund raised was Sequoia
Growth at $8 billion. The $100 billion Softbank Vision
Fund is in a league of its own — more capital than all
venture funds combined, promising trillions in return.
Such a leap in the punctuated equilibrium of funds is
a once-in-a-lifetime event, where it leaps 100X over
the average fund size of $1 billion. A billion no longer
brings a sense of awe, but a $100 billion fund might
be trending alongside #respect and #unicorns. With
COVID pandemic, we are forced to make investment
decisions without much face-to-face interactions. I am
sure such a shift will eliminate a lot of meeting room

-- 23 of 546 --

xxii 	PREfAcE
theatrics, posturing, and above all — the nonsensical
CEO assessments, where VCs make leadership judg-
ments in a few hours and are always wrong.
2. Veni, Vedi, VC. Let's conquer and disrupt everything.
The final frontier is death. Brave scientists and found-
ers, armed with capital, have raised capital to mine
asteroids, live on Mars (the planet, not the chocolate fac-
tory), and solve for every problem — existent or imag-
ined. One startup was launched so that we could just
say “yo” to each other. It raised a few million and then
died. Investment thesis have expanded from software
and technology domains, to new promises and fertile
lands. Like nomadic farmers, VCs are rushing into new
territories — artificial intelligence, robotics, blockchain,
finance and insurance technologies, and an alphabet
soup of buzzwords that include 5G and IoT, sprinkled
with quantum, edge-computing. The opportunity set is
broad. GPs have a hard time focusing — we are all kids
in this global candy shop of innovation. This is the best
time to be in the business of VC.
3. More money = more competition = higher entry valuations =
lower returns. With additional flows of capital, we are
reminded of the basics of economic theory. Supply and
demand, prices and elasticity — as VCs chase risk-
adjusted returns, the valuation curves in later-stage
companies have started to bend dramatically. Or let me
put it another way — valuations have become crazy
pricey. And as one side goes up, another goes down.
This impacts potential for generating returns. Increased
valuations have got very little to do with higher acqui-
sition values or superior exit outcomes — it's merely a
function of more money chasing a few good opportuni-
ties. So as the competition heats up, we need to improve
sourcing skills, engage with founders via disciplined
processes, and understand how we can deliver higher
probabilistic outcomes. Boy, this game just got a lot more
serious. So it's time to hone your investment skills.

-- 24 of 546 --

PREfAcE 	xxiii
4. Honing your skills beyond term sheets and balance sheets is
important. Are you good at probability? Playing poker?
Nerdy enough to bet on technology trends? How do you
want to play — are you fiercely competitive? Or are you
like Peter Thiel, who likes monopolistic hidden gems
and operates like a chess grandmaster? He is also good
at probabilistic betting and snagging big outcomes — his
$500,000 investment in Facebook generated a 10,000X
return. Even his $1.5 million bet on Donald Trump's
election campaign paid off big time, while CRV, an East
Coast venture firm, blazoned its website home page
with “F*ck Trump” on election day. So as an investor,
you have to decide which part of the playground you
want to play in. Business, finance, politics, power — or
a mix of all. This will define your investment thesis or
strategy and help you to hone your areas of focus. With
pandemics, trade wars, and geopolitical shifts, new
opportunities continue to arise, and the world is indeed
your oyster. Try to make sense of all these trends and
then do the most difficult part — develop some unique
points of view, not widely understood or accepted. You
make money only when you find hidden gems in non-
obvious places.
5. We take ourselves too seriously, and imitate each other mind-
lessly. Most VCs like to portray themselves as super-
intellectuals when all they do is rinse and recycle ideas,
picked up from others. Most VCs mindlessly imitate a
handful of top-tier investors, chasing their investments
while positioning themselves as thought leaders. HBO
launched a parody. . . er . . . a comedy show on the antics
of VCs and founders in Silicon Valley. We have come a
long way indeed when we have our own show — a sign
of maturity. It's not just investment strategies or author-
ing blog posts and essays that are being mimicked. Be
it office space or fashion, VCs herd together from Sand
Hill Road to South Park. Patagonia vests are so popu-
lar with VCs in Silicon Valley, Fortune magazine ran a

-- 25 of 546 --

xxiv 	PREfAcE
parody post titled “Group of White Men in Patagonia
Vests Confused for VC Fund, Raise $500 Million,” 5 where
one fictitious VC, Evan, says, “At first I tried to tell peo-
ple we don't work in venture capital. . .But then I got to
thinking, how hard can it be? I can always tell which
ideas are good ideas, and now I have a few hundred mil-
lion dollars to prove it.” One of their investments was
in Patagon.io (no relation to Patagonia), which is expe-
riencing hockey-stick growth. To make their job really
easy, they backed a group of data scientists who have
found a way to use drones and artificial intelligence
to geolocate groups of white men wearing Patagonia
vests in order to predict future investment opportuni-
ties. Amen!
6. We rationalize in hindsight, and don't fully understand our
biases. One of the finest books on human behavior, Think-
ing Fast and Slow by Daniel Kahneman is fat and dense,
but it can give you insights in your own mind's operat-
ing system (or the OS and the BS in our heads). Or Work-
place Poker by Dan Rust can help you play politics better,
and even gracefully tackle your smiley-faced backstab-
bing partners. Try to understand your special skills and
unfair advantages that can help you win — you may
be able to spot technology trends while others are busy
elsewhere, or know people that can bring value to your
world in creative ways. You may be a well-connected
princeling or have access to the corridors of power.
Improving your game involves maintaining a student
mind-set, understating human psychology, biases in
decision-making, spotting groupthink, avoiding false
starts or flash trends, and catching big waves.
7. The VC business model is evolving, but slowly — very slowly.
When Fred Wilson was asked how the VC model will
evolve in 20 years, he said, “All I know is that it will be
different.” He was humble enough to avoid making gran-
diose predictions. The only significant innovation in the
past decade has been that carry has gone from 20 percent

-- 26 of 546 --

PREfAcE 	xxv
to 30 percent for some firms, while losses have wors-
ened. In recent years, we have seen the rise of online
platforms to facilitate more transactions and liquidity
(AngelList, SecondMarkets) and the use of big-data and
AI (just Google “Chris Farmer and SignalFire” and see
how his data-driven VC approach can disrupt the dis-
ruptors), and the distributed ledger. It can shift the flow
of capital from the LP-GP-founder trickle to a game-
changing peer-to-peer funding model. Fun times ahead.
Build on these last 50 years of VC legacy and create your
own recipe for VC in the next 50 — your own brave new world.
And don’t compare yourself to the VC heroes and gods, but
carve your own authentic path.
As advertising guru David Ogilvy once said, “Aim for the
company of immortals.”

-- 27 of 546 --



-- 28 of 546 --

xxvii
Acknowledgments
Each of us bears the imprint
Of a friend met along the way;
In each the trace of each.
For good or evil
In wisdom or in folly
Everyone stamped by everyone.
—Primo Levi
And so, this book bears an imprint of many brilliant minds,
friends good and wise. This labor of love would not have
been possible without the help of all those who shared their
experiences, insights, and wisdom — in sharing tactical and
strategic, they also show us how to become better people,
living their lives with the precepts of #givefirst. Thank you,
Brad, for sharing your knowledge, abundance of spirit, and
generosity of the soul. You are, indeed, the silent force that
works relentlessly for the greater good, like the Gandhi of
Venture Capital. I am deeply grateful to Scott Kupor, managing
partner at Andreessen Horowitz (A16Z) and former chairman
of National Venture Capital Association. Scott is a gifted and
empathetic leader. His big heart and rigorous intellectual
engagement have helped and guided many, including me.
Having good role models in our business is important, so thank
you to all those who spent time with me — too numerous to
name — your quotes, wisdom, insights, and fingerprints are
all over this book. You have helped shape the minds of inves-
tors of tomorrow with your ethos, behavior, blog posts, and
tweets.

-- 29 of 546 --

xxviii 	Acknowledgments
This book, in its third edition now, has stood upon the
shoulders of investor-giants. When the first edition came out a
decade ago, I had no idea where all this was going. You, dear
reader, have made this journey an absolute delight. I am grate-
ful to you for all the numerous emails, reviews, feedback, and
comments for the previous editions. All your kind words are
rightfully deserving of the VCs mentioned in this book. They
are the lead singers who deserve the applause and gratitude.
That I get to hang out with such smart, generous people is a
blessing.
Above all, I thank the Great Spirit — the mysterious
unknown that inspires and guides us to pursue greater good,
gives us the tenacity to stay the course in tough times, and
helps us to bring our gifts to society.

-- 30 of 546 --

Part One
1
Most good beginnings in this land of venture capital careers
involve some planning, some luck, and not taking yourself too
seriously. How does this business work — what does an aver-
age day look like — how do you get in and how do you grow —
and what are the pitfalls? Is it just about making money —
multiplying green pieces of paper and filthy lucre?
Should you try to keep improving every day? “If you are
under the impression you have already perfected yourself, you
will never rise to the heights you are no doubt capable of,”
Kazuo Ishiguro, wrote in his book, The Remains of the Day. It is
no wonder that Jeff Bezos, founder and CEO of Amazon, refers
to this book as one of his favorites.
What makes a good VC? Is it skill, tenacity, or that mys-
terious stroke of luck? Is it a network of relationships, or is it
market timing? And who decides what is good? If you follow
the industry standards, then it’s largely returns — cash-on-
cash multiples you can generate as fast as you can. That will
get you a place on the vanity charts of Forbes Midas List of
Venture Capitalists, which can elevate your brand and career
prospectus. How do you grow as a person? Should VCs think
about their role in society — to support and enhance systems
of governance, better education, role of arts, and a healthier
The Making of a VC

-- 31 of 546 --

2 	PART ONE 	ThE MAkiNg Of A VC
environment? Or should we pretend that those problems do
not belong to us nor affect us?
As my mama said, never trust anyone who tells you how
to get in but does not show you how to get out — be it a swim-
ming pool, a dark cave with supposedly hidden treasures, or
the business of venture capital. Hanging out with cool found-
ers every day, discussing the latest bleeding-edge trends, can
be fun, even addictive. You need to know how to get out of
this business. Alcoholics Anonymous has a 12-step program to
recovery — but for investors addicted to the adrenalin rush of
cool-tech and exit-highs, there are no support groups. On that
note, I have added a chapter on your own exit strategies — just
as you get in, you should know how to graciously find your
way out of the maze.

-- 32 of 546 --

1
3
INTRODUCTION: AN OPERATIONAL PRIMER
For Masayoshi Son, raising a $100 billion Softbank Vision fund
was easy. As he quips, it was “$45 billion in 45 minutes” — his
45-minute meeting with Saudi Arabia’s crown prince kicked off
the fund raise. To the prince, Masa offered a gift. “I want to give
you a Masa gift, the Tokyo gift, a $1 trillion gift. Here’s how
I can give you a $1 trillion gift: You invest $100 billion in my
fund, I give you a trillion.” Son left the meeting with a commit-
ment of $45 billion, and other investors followed soon thereaf-
ter. The world’s largest venture fund was off to the races.
But if raising $100 billion was that easy, the doyens of Sand
Hill Road venture firms would have done it long ago. For Soft-
bank, the journey started in the year 2000, with a $20 million
investment in Alibaba, a startup that would eventually grow
into a Chinese e-commerce giant. Alibaba went public in 2014,
and at that time, Softbank’s 28 percent stake in the company
was valued at $58 billion. Son had also invested in Yahoo! in
1996 and reaped its rewards, following the company’s IPO
four years later. Son’s fascination with the world of technology
started with the microprocessor. “When I was 17 years old, the
very first time I saw a photo of a microprocessor, it made me
cry. I was overwhelmed,” he would say. As the waves of inno-
vation rose and fell, the teeny microprocessor spawned into
The Business of Cash
and Carry

-- 33 of 546 --

4 	ThE BUsINEss Of CAsh AND CARRy
the World Wide Web in the 1990s, followed by the cloud and
mobility a decade later. Son kept surfing along and is poised to
ride the next trend — be it technological changes like robotics,
automation, and artificial intelligence (AI) or societal changes
such as ridesharing, vertical farming, and food delivery.
Those who have analyzed his historic investment track
record point to the fact that even if you slice off the biggest
win — his Alibaba investment — the rest of his portfolio
shows above 40 percent internal rate of return (IRR). When the
industry average performance is in the mid-teens, having such
a significant edge in investment performance helps. Combine
that with a boldness of vision and the ability to execute on a
global investment strategy and voilà — you have $45 billion in
45 minutes.
The venture capitalist’s journey often begins with the ability
to raise a venture fund (Exhibit 1.1). The universe of investors
in any venture fund includes two broad categories: (a) institu-
tional investors such as pension funds, foundations, university
endowments, sovereign wealth funds, business corporations,
and (b) high-net-worth individuals (HNWIs) and their family
offices (see Exhibit 1.2). Institutional investors primarily view
venture funds as an asset class, a money-making machine that
promises to deliver an annualized “risk-adjusted” IRR.
Identify underserved
market opportunities ripe
for investment
Develop Investment
Strategy
Work with CEO / Board
members to identify
timing, tactics for
optimum exit values
Generate Returns
Invest in target
companies within three
to five years
Build Portfolio
Guidance on best
practices, strategy,
customer relations and
recruiting.,
Focus on Value
Creation
Identify target Limited
Partners (LPs) and raise
the fund
Attract Investors	Effectively manage
Venture Firm’s
Brand & Operations
{People + Processes}
Investors pay a fund
management fee of 2%
of committed capital
per year
Investors collect 80% of
investment profits and
balance 20% is shared
by the fund managers
Exhibit 1.1 Venture capital business model.

-- 34 of 546 --

INTRODUCTION: AN OPERATIONAL PRIMER 	5
The VC business model is simple: a venture capitalist, or
general partner (GP), knocks on the door of various investors,
known as limited partners (LP), to raise a fund. LPs agree to
invest in venture funds based on the venture capitalist’s back-
ground, investment expertise and past performance, a compel-
ling investment strategy, and, to some extent, that mystical X
factor — an amalgamation of ability, skills, and luck that defies
any logical construct and makes one practitioner more success-
ful than the others.
The two groups — the GP as the investment manager and
the LP as the provider of capital — form a 10-year partnership.
The LP agrees to pay the GP a management fee each year and
a share in a percentage of the profits. In turn, the GP agrees to
work night and day to find hot, blazing startups, to invest the
capital, turn them into unicorns (billion-dollar valued compa-
nies), and harvest the money back in large multiples. The end
game for the LP is to make a superior risk-adjusted financial
return. The primary measure of success for the venture firm
is the IRR and cash-on-cash (C-on-C) return, a multiple of the
original investment amount or multiple of invested capital
(MOIC). Venture firms and GPs live, and are slaughtered by,
these two metrics.
To better understand the economics, take the example of a
$100 million fund. The GPs of the fund would invest this capi-
tal in, say, about a dozen companies and after building value
Foundations
Pension Funds
Invest as
Limited Partners
in VC Funds
Fund-of-Funds
Individuals/
Family Offices
Exhibit 1.2 Limited partners.

-- 35 of 546 --

6 	ThE BUsINEss Of CAsh AND CARRy
aspire to “exit” the investments, meaning to sell the ownership.
Should these investments generate profits, the investors (or
LPs) keep 80 percent of the profits, and the GPs take home
20 percent. The profit, called carried interest or carry, where one-
fifth profits were shared, has evolved from the time of Phoeni-
cians, who in the year 1200 CE commanded 20 percent of profits
earned from trade and shipping merchandise. In addition to the
carry, the LPs also pay the GPs an annual management fee, typ-
ically 2 to 2.5 percent of the committed capital per year. Thus,
for a $100 million fund with a predetermined life of 10 years,
annual fees of 2 percent yield $2 million for the firm. The fees
provide for the day-to-day operations of the firm and are used
to pay for salaries, travel, operational, and legal expenses. The
responsibilities and compensation packages are determined by
the professional’s responsibilities and experience.
A venture fund is defined as a fixed pool of capital raised
for investing per an agreed-upon investment strategy. A ven-
ture firm manages this fund, and, over time, a firm can manage
multiple funds. The GPs are the primary investment decision
makers and are supported by a team of investment and admin-
istrative professionals.
To get a venture fund off the ground, several such inves-
tors have to be pitched, engaged, convinced, cajoled, and even
threatened to commit to a fund. This is often a long, arduous
journey for most venture professionals. Fundraising stretches
every thread — salesmanship, tenacity, and fortitude. To start
with, it’s never easy to identify the right target set of inves-
tors. It’s like searching for a black cat in a dark room — often,
the cat does not exist and you can spin around in the dark
room. Assuming you can build a target list of fund investors,
all the classical challenges of any sales process come into play.
Getting in the door, engagement with the decision makers,
pushing to a close with not one but at least a dozen or more
investors requires special talents. Seldom do investors respond
promptly, offer clear feedback on their decision-making crite-
ria, process, and time lines.
Building momentum amongst a group of disparate investors
to reach a satisfactory fund size takes as much as 18 months

-- 36 of 546 --

ROLEs, REsPONsIBILITIEs, AND COMPENsATION 	7
and is often compared to an uphill crawl on broken glass.
Attracting, engaging, and assembling a large number of inves-
tors is often like a game of house of cards. If one of them pulls
out early in the process, a cascading effect can occur. For every
fund that makes it to the finish line, at least three die a pre-
mature death, littering the venture graveyards with unfulfilled
ambitions, ill-timed strategies, and broken partnerships that
never got off the ground.
Once the “fund” is subscribed to its target amount, it is
closed and no new investors are admitted. The life of such a
fund is typically 10 years, during which the venture profes-
sionals build a portfolio of companies and aspire to generate
returns. The fund is typically dissolved after the tenth year, or
when all portfolio investments have been liquidated.
After the fundraising process is complete, venture profes-
sionals are under pressure to deploy the capital. During this
investment period, startups come in, investors check them out,
and the mating dance begins. Pitch decks, term sheets, valua-
tions, and board seats are negotiated as a venture fund builds a
portfolio of 20–24 companies within three to five years. A typi-
cal portfolio size for any fund can be 10–30 companies, based
on the sector and stage of investment.
ROLEs, REsPONsIBILITIEs, AND COMPENsATION
In any venture firm, the cast of characters includes the GPs
(also known as managing directors or managing GPs), vice
presidents, principals, associates, and analysts (Exhibit 1.3).
These primary investment professionals are responsible for
generating returns. Newer titles have evolved as fund opera-
tions have become more focused. For example, in larger funds,
roles such as director of business development or the head of
deal sourcing have emerged. The administrative team, also
referred to as the back office, is responsible for the day-to-day
operational aspects. This team includes chief operating officer,
chief financial officer, general counsel administrative, and
human resources.

-- 37 of 546 --

8 	ThE BUsINEss Of CAsh AND CARRy
The primary responsibilities of the investment team differ
along the lines of seniority. On any typical day, the GPs would
juggle a number of activities: negotiating terms for investment
opportunities, participating in boards of current portfolio com-
panies, responding to any LP/investor requests, and putting
out a few fires along the way. On a rare day, exit negotiations
may occur. An entry-level analyst is expected to source invest-
ment opportunities and conduct the first screening of due dili-
gence. At the other end of the spectrum, the partners keep a
close watch on portfolio construction, governance, exits, and
strategy and timing of the next fund. The typical compensa-
tion package includes a salary, annual performance bonus,
and a share of the profits called carry, which stands for car-
ried interest.
As they say, any fool can write a check, but it takes some
skill (and luck) to generate financial returns. To select and win
the right investment opportunity in a highly competitive envi-
ronment calls for a blend of analytical rigor and speed, with a
strong brand and network of relationships. Yet despite all the
front-end challenges, almost 80 percent of all investments fail.
Unproven technologies, shifting market dynamics, manage-
ment team challenges, competition, and regulation can kill a
Managing
Director
Managing
Director
Head of
Operations
Finance 	Legal
Investment
Team
Member 1
Associate/
Analyst
Investment
Team
Member 2
Exhibit 1.3 Fund organization chart.

-- 38 of 546 --

ROLEs, REsPONsIBILITIEs, AND COMPENsATION 	9
company. Any venture fund’s portfolio will eventually end up
with a mix of successes, some average outcomes, and flame-
outs. A typical rule of thumb is that one-third of the portfolio
companies return 5X to 10X multiple of invested capital; one-
third will generate lower outcomes — say 1X to 2X of invested
capital, and the final one-third of the portfolio will fail — be
the scars on the back, relegated to the “experience” bucket as
total losses.
Returns are measured by MOIC and IRR. While the multi-
ple of invested capital is often touted as a metric of success, it is
equally important to demonstrate speed. The IRR is a function
of time. Its underlying notion of time-value of money implies
that a dollar today is more valuable than a dollar tomorrow.
Put a different way, time is your enemy. The faster you can sell,
or exit, a portfolio company, for as high an amount, the higher
the IRR. As seen in Exhibit 1.4, the holding period of an invest-
ment can have a significant impact on IRR, while the multiple
on invested capital remains the same.
A fund’s portfolio companies are reduced to a single line
statistic — measured primarily by multiple of invested capital
and gross IRR. See Exhibit 1.5.
On the surface, the business looks like a fascinating game,
where you can write large checks, dole out advise to found-
ers, and write blog posts in media touting your investment
thesis. Beneath the surface, there is a fair amount of uncer-
tainty, stress, competition, and turmoil. As Sir Michael Moritz
of Sequoia Capital once said, “It is a business of a thousand
soap operas.”
Exhibit 1.4 The Advantages of Shorter Holding Periods.
Company
Capital
Invested ($m)
Realized
Value ($m)
Holding
Period (years)
Multiple on
Invested Capital
(MOIC) 	Gross IRR (%)
Company 1 	$1.0m 	$5.0m 	2 	5X 	123.6 %
Company 2 	$1.0m 	$5.0m 	6 	5X 	37.9 %

-- 39 of 546 --

10 	ThE BUsINEss Of CAsh AND CARRy
Top Takeaways
Launching a venture firm requires:
• 	A bold vision aligned with market forces
• 	Compelling and timely investment strategy
• 	Investment performance/track record
• 	And above all, the ability to be persuasive
Exhibit 1.5 Fund Portfolio Returns.
Portfolio Company
Capital
Invested ($m)
Current
Value ($m)
Multiple on Invested
Capital (MOIC) 	Gross IRR
Company A 	$6.50 	$39.20 	6.08X 	60.60 %
Company B 	$2.10 	$2.10 	1X 	0.00 %
Company C 	$9.60 	$33.10 	3.8X 	46.20 %
Company D 	$6.80 	$0.60 	0.09X 	–53.00 %
Fund 	$25.00 	$75.00 	3.00X 	51.2 %

-- 40 of 546 --

2
11
Fueling the frontiers of innovation, being an agent of change,
supporting the next generation founders, asymmetric finan-
cial gains, freedom/autonomy from the 9-to-5 drudgery, or the
thrill of building companies — the role of venture capitalists is
never dull. If anything, it is like a drug — easy to get hooked
and high, harder to let go.
CREATIVE CONSTRUCTION
One of the influential economists, Joseph Schumpeter, coined
the term creative destruction, where industries are decimated
when innovative trends occur: The “gale of creative destruction”
whips through the “process of industrial mutation that inces-
santly revolutionizes the economic structure from within, inces-
santly destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new one.” On
the other side are where the forces of creative construction,
entrepreneurs and venture capitalists, are at work. When a
paradigm shift occurs in any technological ecosystem, it is
more likely that a founder and some venture capital investors
are stoking that disruptive entrepreneurial fire. “See, venture
capital is reducible to a few words. You have to be interested
in managing change, and you have to recognize that change
Why Choose a Career
in VC

-- 41 of 546 --

12 	Why ChOOSE A CAREER IN VC
is necessary,” 1 says Donald T. Valentine, founder of Sequoia
Capital. To be a part of creating that new new thing can be
immensely satisfying.
INTELLECTUAL STIMULATION
A career in venture capital investing is “the most fun you can
have with your clothes on,” says Deepak Kamra of Canaan
Partners.2 A day in the life of a venture capitalist is full of
stimulating conversations with entrepreneurs who are chang-
ing the world. At various points in their startup journey, entre-
preneurs seek investors, not only for the moolah but to test
assumptions, validate their concepts, and prepare for the road
ahead. Amid all these caffeine-laden dreams, the investor is
exposed to a steep learning curve of technological changes,
the shifting sands of market dynamics, sources of opportunity,
and competitive constraints. For those who thrive on comfort
in ambiguity, a rapid pace, headbutting with type A entrepre-
neurs, and “those crazy ones,” the career path of venture capi-
tal offers it all. Elizabeth “Beezer” Clarkson, managing director
of Sapphire Ventures, says, “We forget how unusual this career
is. We are privileged. Other sectors seem pale in comparison
when we look at the range of energy and creativity that flows
to us. It can be addictive.”
MENTOR CAPITALISTS
Those who have had a successful entrepreneurial journey
often see venture capital as a pathway of imparting their les-
sons to the founders and entrepreneurs. “At a certain point in
your career, it is more satisfying to help entrepreneurs than
to be one,” says Marc Andreessen, co-founder of Andreessen
Horowitz.3 Scott Weiss joined Andreessen Horowitz after sell-
ing his company, IronPort Systems, to Cisco. “Being a venture
capitalist gives me the opportunity to mentor and offer direc-
tion to the entrepreneurs. They trust my judgment because I

-- 42 of 546 --

ASyMMETRICAL REWARDS 	13
have been down this path before,” he points out. Several practi-
tioners agreed that the VC career path allows them to continue
to live vicariously through supporting other entrepreneurs.
ASyMMETRICAL REWARDS
Venture capital is an “antifragile” career with fundamental
asymmetry. Hourly wage earners get paid for time, not value.
This may be one of the few career paths that offer exponen-
tial financial returns while bringing innovation and positive
change to society. In his book Antifragile, author Nicho-
las Naseem Taleb defines asymmetry to be when you have
more upside than downside and tend to gain from volatility,
Exhibit 2.1 The perks of being a VC in Silicon Valley — reserved parking.

-- 43 of 546 --

14 	Why ChOOSE A CAREER IN VC
randomness, stressors, errors, time, and uncertainty. Ven-
ture capitalists thrive on information asymmetry. They have
a ringside view of the technological future, and the com-
panies they have funded are often the ones to become the
next-generation behemoths. Financial gains are expected as
a byproduct of value creation, but only after asymmetry is
identified and realized.
In Silicon Valley, where parking is a perk reserved for the
rich, you even find spots that are for exclusive use of venture
capitalists. Along with pregnant mothers-to-be, disabled and
handicapped, and the environmentally conscious Tesla own-
ers, you find a spot reserved for the VCs (Exhibit 2.1). I once
parked at such a spot to see how it might be enforced — do
uniformed parking police officers come by, check my LinkedIn
profile, my assets-under-management (AUM), and approve
with a stern nod? And under what circumstances would I get
a parking ticket?
Anyone who wants to be a VC but says it’s not for the money
is lying. Trying to get-rich-quick in this business has caused
more destruction and career implosions. In a rush, naive inves-
tors have made decisions that have hurt companies, founders,
and their own psyche. VC is a long game, where results prove
out after a decade. If you want to see your financial returns at
4 p.m. every day, join a hedge fund.

-- 44 of 546 --

3
15
Success in the world of investing boils down to the ability
to pick “good” investments. “You have to become a great
buyer,” says Mike Maples of Floodgate Fund. Yet the abil-
ity to pick the good investments sounds deceptively easy, as
any fool can write a check. And we typically realize our folly
after making a lot of bad investments. Or as they say, good
judgment comes from experience, and experience comes
from bad judgment.
The primary goal for any venture capitalist is to create value —
for their entrepreneurs and their fund investors. “We are in the
business of helping a company achieve critical path mile-
stones. Being able to determine what is critical path is a
matter of survival — our job is to be insanely rigorous about
what the critical path is.” A definitive characteristic about a
venture capitalist is being analytical about these milestones,
says James Bryer, former chairman, National Venture Capital
Association.
Successful venture capitalists have an entrepreneurial
mindset, the ability to understand the basics of value creation.
Yet, the background of some of the leading venture capitalists
demonstrates no clear pattern. You could have operational
expertise. Or not. To become better at the art of investing, here
are a few attributes.
Attributes of Successful
VCs

-- 45 of 546 --

16 	ATTRIBUTES OF SUCCESSFUL VCs
STRONG AWARENESS OF TECH TRENDS
As any candidate who aspires to be a VC someday, new entrants
can bring new insights in an ever-evolving technology world.
Where are the new hidden opportunities? How best can we
gain access to them? The only way you would be able to add
value to the venture firm is if you live, breathe, and surf on the
edge of those technology waves. As a newly minted investor,
try to build a list of 10 key technology trends that will impact
our society over the next decade. Identify three to five trends
that appeal to you, and in which you might have an edge. The
best way to validate your thinking is to seek some guidance
from seasoned investors. Never hesitate to send a cold email,
but make it respectful and well-crafted. “I am always happy
to help — it makes it easier when I get a thoughtful request,”
says Brad Feld, of Foundry Group. But know that most VCs
are spread very thin on time. To make a strong impact, a deep
and a thorough level of preparation is essential.
When I interviewed Terry McGuire of Polaris Ventures, a
VC of 25 years, he said, “I like it when a candidate says, why
did you invest in this company as opposed to that one? Not
only did you check out our website but combined that with
an awareness of technology waves and other opportunities
therein.” So while you can get in the door of a VC, what will
keep you there is your level of thinking, preparation, disci-
pline, and homework.
“A lot of good venture capitalists have ‘situational aware-
ness’ — they can walk into just about any kind of meeting and,
in about five minutes, figure out who’s doing what to whom
and exactly what the issues are, sort of cut through it and fig-
ure out what’s going on. You can look at a given situation and
project its trajectory reasonably well,” says James R. Swartz,
formerly of Accel Partners. “You need to build a frame of ref-
erence by which to judge people and to judge opportunities
and to be able to judge markets and what’s going on in the
economy,” says Reid Dennis, founder of Institutional Ven-
ture Partners.

-- 46 of 546 --

ABILITY TO PICK WINNERS 	17
Christopher Rizik, a former VC who now manages Renais-
sance Venture Fund, a fund of funds (FoF), says, “Have a good
sense of the world around you and how it is changing. After
all, we put money behind ideas that change the world — the
demographic, technological — unfilled needs. You have to be
open and curious to look out into the future.”
ABILITY TO PICK WINNERS
Entrepreneurial expertise matters, but not as much. What mat-
ters is the value you create. Venture capitalists love it when a
potential candidate has some entrepreneurial expertise — has
built a product, attracted investor capital, managed teams,
and led a company to an exit. Those very skills can sometimes
become a handicap to an investor. One of the operator-turned-
investors shared with me that the hardest part of their role is
to stay on the sidelines. “It is not your role to be the CEO. I am
always trying to run the company in proxy — jump in to save
the company, steer it in the right direction or drive it faster.”
There is indeed no predictor of success in VC, so don’t let the
lack of entrepreneurial experience stop you. Investment bank-
ers, McKinsey consultants, lawyers, and journalists have made
successful forays in the VC world. Your resume does not count
anymore as much as value you may have created for founders.
As the founders sing your praises, other founders will soon
hear about it and start to call you, as opposed to you chasing
opportunities all day. As you sift through these opportunities,
becoming a good judge of human character and entrepreneur-
ial abilities is critical. “We see a lot of executives who have a
vision. Our job is to decide if it really is a vision or a hallucina-
tion,” one VC remarked. Once you can pick the winner, you
have to move fast. “Having a great brand is a good start. Speed
of decision-making is equally important,” says Jeff Clavier of
Uncork VC. If you like the startup, you have to move quickly
to seal the deal. If you don’t, someone will gladly do so. This
is a highly competitive business, especially in Silicon Valley.

-- 47 of 546 --

18 	ATTRIBUTES OF SUCCESSFUL VCs
OPTIMISM, PATIENCE, AND STABILITY
“You have to believe that the world can change . . . be optimis-
tic and at the same time, be realistic and guarded, not roman-
tic,” says Terry McGuire, co-founder, Polaris Ventures and
Emeritus Chairman of National Venture Capital Association.
“You’ve got to be a good listener. I find if the venture capital-
ist does all the talking, he doesn’t learn very much about the
people he’s thinking about investing in. Very important to lis-
ten . . . and judge who looks and feels like they have the mak-
ings of making a real company. Eventually, it becomes instinct
if you do it often enough,” says Paul “Pete” Bancroft, former
CEO of Bessemer Securities, former chairman of National Ven-
ture Capital Association. It’s a combination of innate skills
(optimism, judgment, comfort in ambiguity) combined with
real-world experience. “Good instinct, well honed by experi-
ence, makes a good venture capitalist. The most difficult part is
dealing with uncertainty,” says C. Richard Kramlich, chairman
and co-founder, New Enterprise Associates (NEA). Chris Rizik
adds this:
Nothing will be as fast as you want. A smart practitioner
never panics or gives up when companies hit a bump. Those
who are patient will not only profit but will ultimately suc-
ceed at the expense of those who panic. Patience should be
married with intelligence — if you can no longer achieve the
end game, it takes discipline to walk away and say, we are
just not going to get there. Swallow hard and realize you just
lost a few million. Along the way, we have to be fair with
one and all. What goes around comes around. In the end, the
best VCs are people who were fair, were smart, and treated
everyone well. People seldom want to work with those who
are out only for themselves.
ABILITY TO LEARN AND GROW
While there is no good predictor of what makes a good ven-
ture capitalist, some patterns are obvious. Those without

-- 48 of 546 --

ABILITY TO LEARN AND GROW 	19
substantial startup or operating experience can be suc-
cessful in the profession. Although domain expertise may
be good, it certainly is not of significant importance in the
long run. Your performance eventually matters. “In my
20-year career as a venture capitalist, I have invested in all
kinds of domains and companies. For long-term success in
this business, you have to think more generally and push
yourself out of your comfort zone. You should be willing
to reinvent yourself,” says David Cowan, Bessemer Venture
Partners.
It’s not just a few skills that matter but the ability to “adapt/
grow” with the company and reinvent oneself. Promod Haque
of Norwest Venture Partners echoes this sentiment:
Being a venture capitalist requires a varying degree of
skills. At a seed stage, the skills required are different from
say, investments at a mid or later stage. At the seed stage,
we have a founder. The venture practitioner needs to have
the ability to understand risk, validate ideas, and connect
these to the market. Exploration and validation are key
steps at this stage. A startup is a no-name entity — the
credibility and track record of the venture practitioner
can be a tremendous asset in recruiting management
talent and customers. Talent that can grow the company
is usually in high demand and otherwise would not be
available. In the early stage, the practitioner’s ability to
help the startup to find customers is very important. The
Fortune 100 companies — those marquee customers that
all startups seek — unfortunately avoid startups. They
are trying to minimize the number of vendors and stick
with the proven ones . . . even if you get your foot in the
door, these companies need time and ability to assess
the new product. It’s a significant commitment . . . these
are extremely busy executives and asking them to check
a new product out requires strong suite of skills. As the
company evolves further, the ability to syndicate the
investment becomes critical. Other investors will look at
how you are putting the investment rationale and leading
the round.

-- 49 of 546 --

20 	ATTRIBUTES OF SUCCESSFUL VCs
AN INHERENT BIAS FOR ACTION
Seth Levine of the Foundry Group says that a good practi-
tioner needs to have some attention deficit disorder (ADD) to
be a good venture capitalist:
The core of being a good VC is the ability to move from
one thing to the next, often completely disconnected thing,
quickly and without slowing down. Rare is the time when I
sit down and spend a few hours doing something (anything)
without interruption; so much so that I generally interrupt
myself these days if I’m spending too much time on any one
thing, but mostly because in any given day things just seem
to come up constantly. With something like eight companies
that I actively work with these interruptions are all over
the map — I may be helping one company sell its business,
another raise capital, another plan for a strategic offsite and
another with an executive search. Keeping all of this straight
in my head is a bit of a task, as is shifting gears from talking
about the tax considerations of a particular merger structure
with one company to looking at moving into a new vertical
market for another.
To summarize, a good VC has the ability to pick good
investments and help build great companies. VCs with a mix
of business experience and empathy, a supportive mindset can
be “the investor of choice” and magnet for entrepreneurs. As
long as your internal axis is tilting toward supporting, as Steve
Jobs would say, those crazy ones, the journey will be a joyride.

-- 50 of 546 --

4
21
In a business of 10X outcomes, there are 100X applicants
for every open position. And within the best venture firms,
there are no openings posted publicly. Firms are small,
tightly knit groups — a rock band, or a sports team of high
performers — and bringing in a new team member requires
careful thought, planning, and execution, else the whole
thing blows up. Partners are vetted carefully over multiple
engagements and long dating periods and are hired within
known circles. Philosopher and author Joseph Campbell
once wrote, “A bit of advice, given to a young Native Amer-
ican at the time of his initiation — As you go the way of
life, you will see a great chasm. Jump. It is not as wide as
you think.”
There are no barriers at all to entry, indeed, to get into
the business of venture capital. The veritable pipeline of
wanna-be investors is infinite and never-ending, with eager-
beavers, gold-diggers, carpet baggers, opportunists, and
some very few prepared minds. To practice law or medicine,
you have the bar examination. Or enroll in a residency, put
in grueling hours and start at the bottom of the proverbial
ladder. The venture capitalists’ career path is not barricaded
in any way, except intellect and investable capital. Some
VCs have both.
Welcome to the Land
of Ad-Venture

-- 51 of 546 --

22 	Welcome to the land of ad-Venture
roleS and reSPonSIBIlItIeS of a Vc
“. . . you need a license to drive a car or buy a gun,
but not to be a venture capitalist.”
—Marc Andreessen, co-founder,
Andreessen Horowitz (A16Z)
At New Enterprise Associates (NEA), one of the leading
venture firms on Sand Hill Road with over $10 billion under
management today, a bright associate level candidate shared
his travails with me. After spending two years in investment
banking, he joined NEA, where he is focused on enterprise
software investments. The young man was adept and spoke
fluently on all the major technology trends and the alphabet
soup of IoT, 5G, and AI. “I was stunned to see how hard work-
ing most partners are at our firm,” he says. To newcomers seek-
ing to dip their toe in venture capital, he says, “You have to
prepare for a set of radically different tasks each day. Don’t let
anyone tell you this is easy. And you learn quickly to not take
the first opportunity that walks in the door, but rather analyze
the universe for the best.” Getting into a Sand Hill Road firm
takes a bit of luck, experience, and skills. Yet for others, the
challenges of getting in can be significantly higher.
Take the example of a pre-MBA analyst position posted
at Bessemer Venture Partners, one of the longest-standing
venture capital firms in the country (the firm started in
1911). More than 650 resumes, 42 first-round interviews,
and 7 second-round interviews later, one offer was made.
That’s about 0.15 percent odds for an entry-level position!
Such odds are daunting for any aspirant. Other positions on
LinkedIn attract a large number of applicants, as many as
300 applicants for each position.
An investor with an international venture firm bemoaned
the fact that post-MBA, getting in VC is not as easy. “We over-
optimize for getting into venture but rarely does a candidate
get two competing job offers from two firms. Unlike consult-
ing, investment banking or other career paths where you have

-- 52 of 546 --

roleS and reSPonSIBIlItIeS of a Vc 	23
multiple choices, this is a narrow road.” Compare this with a
career in investment banking and you get a very different pic-
ture. Alice Easton writes in the Daily Princetonian:
After months of dressing up in suits and ties, making their
way to New York or the Nassau Inn and trying to impress
panels of interviewers with their technical and social skills,
juniors applying for summer internships in finance and
consulting can now reap the benefits of their work: elab-
orate “sell days” to convince them to accept the job. . . .
They paid for two nights at a fancy hotel in New York. . . .
They rented out a museum and had a cocktail party, and
then rented out the VIP room in a nightclub in Soho. . . .
They even send chocolates in the mail. . . . They showed
recruits a whole lifestyle. When Goldman Sachs CEO
gave a keynote speech to Wharton MBA students, the first
point he made after stating Goldman Sachs’s $23 billion
in revenue in 2004 was the importance his firm places on
“hiring and retaining the best people” in order to maintain
a “culture of excellence.” 1
Brant Moxley, managing director at Pinnacle Group Inter-
national, an executive recruiting firm that focuses on private
equity and venture capital career opportunities, says, “There
are 10 times the number of applicants for every job opening
in the venture capital arena. The demand is staggering. Strong
operating experience and technical and financial skills, or
experience in the investment banking business may also be a
badge of honor at the entry level. What I find fascinating is
while everyone wants to get in the business of venture capital,
not many understand what it takes to stay in the business.”
Sarah Tavel, a partner at Benchmark, wrote, “People who
tend to rise to the top during the selection process do so because
of their passion, not just for venture capital but for the entire
ecosystem.” 2
A pre-MBA position is, by design, established for two years.
“Ninety percent of the time, these positions are not partner

-- 53 of 546 --

24 	Welcome to the land of ad-Venture
A Typical Venture Capitalist’s (VC’s) Responsibilities
A typical position description for investment professional
would read as follows:
Key tasks and responsibilities. Participate in and contrib-
ute to all aspects of the investment process with respon-
sibility for all quantitative and qualitative analysis of
portfolio companies.
Sourcing and Analysis. Develop a sourcing strategy and
identify key competitive elements in developing a sustained
long term advantage. Evaluate potential opportunities,
including sector research and trend analysis. Conduct
due diligence, assist with deal execution and transaction
management.
Structuring and execution. Negotiate investment structure
in close liaison with the legal team. Prepare and coordinate
the execution of term sheets, investor rights and share
purchase agreements, and other legal documentation.
Portfolio management / Post-investment monitoring.
Support the CEO, identify value-add levers and carry
out portfolio company analysis on a quarterly basis. Stay
up to date on performance variances, top challenges for
each company. Prepare returns forecasts and updates for
limited partners. Awareness of relevant legal aspects of
corporate governance is essential.
Marketing and fundraising. Marketing, positioning, and
fundraising via strong relationships with GPs/investors/
consultants/advisers.
Skills. Knowledge of relevant (health care, technology, fin-
tech) sectors. Transactional experience and analytical abilities.
Advanced financial, business modeling, and writing skills.
Competencies. Results-driven, ambitious, and highly
motivated. Strategic and commercial acumen. An entrepre-
neurial approach, initiative, and adaptability. Team player
with a strong work ethic. Excellent networking skills.

-- 54 of 546 --

roleS and reSPonSIBIlItIeS of a Vc 	25
tracks. At best, an analyst would stay with the firm for three
years, instead of the usual two,” declares Brant.
One “associate”-level job position that got lit up on Twit-
ter was symptomatic of an entitled overlord seeking a slave
or even a grateful piss-boy, ideally on-call round the clock.
Qualifications listed include “someone who grew up poor
or very close to poverty” and has an MBA with experience
at a top consulting firm. But after all that and the ginormous
student-debt, you would start as an executive assistant.
Don’t lose hope, because someday. . .yes, someday you will
be the CEO. Until then, be a slave. “You are someone who
understands and accepts they are working for a boss. . . . You
should be able to build order from chaos, be able to cre-
ate structure for someone who has zero” structure, available
24/7, grew up poor (yes, this was listed as a qualification
in the ad), and provide concierge like service. If all goes
well, you could be the CEO, “make enough for genera-
tions to come.” 3 Would you apply for such a finely crafted
position?
And if you get in, the instability and the churn factor in
this career path are high. C. Richard Kramlich of NEA, once
remarked, “Below the surface there’s a huge amount of turno-
ver.” 4 When Bill Gurley graduated, he wanted to be a venture
capitalist. He went to New York for the first time in his life to
beg for meetings with venture capitalists and was told, “Don’t
even think about it, kid. Go work for 20 years and then come
back.” Gurley went on to become one of the biggest sell-side
analysts on Wall Street, quickly narrowing his focus to “this
thing called the internet, which no one knew anything about
at the time.” Microsoft founder Bill Gates recommended Gur-
ley for his first venture job with Hummer Winblad. Gurley
jumped at the opportunity and said yes before even hearing
the entire offer. 5 Soon Benchmark would come knocking and
recruit him away.
John Doerr of Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers (KPCB)
once remarked, “I cold-called Silicon Valley’s venture groups,
hoping to apprentice myself to one.” 6 His cold-calling efforts

-- 55 of 546 --

26 	Welcome to the land of ad-Venture
did not get him a job at KPCB, but eventually, after five
years at Intel, John would land at this firm. Brooks Byers,
who had asked John to get some experience, famously
invited John Doerr for a 5:30 a.m. jog to see how motivated
he was. John was at the track the next morning and landed
the role.
Like Doerr, Robert Nelsen chased Brooks, too, but
found his calling elsewhere. “I remember cold-calling Brook
Byers, founder of Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, about a
hundred times. . . . I was always interested in venture cap-
ital,” says Robert (Bob) Nelsen. Nelsen went on to be the
cofounder of ARCH Venture Partners (ARCH), which has
now grown to manage multibillion in assets. In his 20-year
investment career, Bob has led nine companies to valuations
of $1 billion or more. “Venture capital was my first career
choice,” he says. In his first year of business school, Bob read
about the launch of ARCH Venture Partners and approached
the founder, Steve Lazarus. “I told Steve I would work for him
for free.” Nelsen started with ARCH as soon as he finished
college. 7
“I heard once that all venture capitalists operated from
3000 Sand Hill Road,” says David Cowan. Sand Hill Road
was the mecca and Andreessen Horowitz, NEA, Sequoia
Capital, Draper Fisher Jurvetson (DFJ), Battery Ventures, and
more were all stationed in the same neighborhood. David,
who had a brief two-year stint at Oracle, was eager to explore
possibilities in the venture universe. One fine afternoon he
drove to Sand Hill Road and walked unannounced into one
of the venture firm’s offices. The lady at the front desk was
firm: “No, we don’t have any openings.” But David per-
sisted. “I am sure you know a few firms who would be look-
ing.” The lady pulled out a copy of the Western Association
of Venture Capitalists directory and circled a few names. “I
wrote letters to five firms. Two of the five offered me a posi-
tion,” recalls David, who has been with Bessemer Venture
Partners, for over two decades years.

-- 56 of 546 --

InternShIPS and camPuS recruItment 	27
Cold-calling a venture capital firm rarely works — espe-
cially in the modern day. “I don’t think that approach will
work today. The business is much more complex and competi-
tive,” warns David. 8 What might work is likely a web pres-
ence. Famously, Union Square Ventures recruited a two-year
rotational analyst position by not seeking resumes but asking
for “web presence.” Union Square defined web presence as
“anything accessible via a URL. It could be a blog, a social net-
working profile, a portfolio, a company, a social bookmarking
archive. . . . It is whatever you think best represents who you
are online.”9
At the entry-level position, differentiators can be few and
competition fierce. A web presence can be a head start in build-
ing your path into a venture career. Building a network of
mentors can also allow for rapid growth. “A good mentor in
this business can be a huge asset,” advises Brant Moxley, who
manages a placement firm, working with some of the leading
investors. “But realize that in a classic venture firm, the senior
partners do not have all the time to mentor juniors. A junior is
like a remora feeding on the leftovers of the shark meal — you
have to make sure you are in the right feeding ground,” he
adds with a chuckle. 10
InternShIPS and camPuS recruItment
Investment banking trumps VC when it comes to campus
recruitment. Taufiq Rahim, a Daily Princetonian columnist,
wrote of what he called the “hunting season” on campus of the
elite. “They’re here. I can see them. I can smell them. They’re
in my inbox. They’re in my mailbox. They’re on my voice-
mail. They’re outside my door. They’re on campus, and they
smell blood. . . . They’re the investment banks, the consulting
firms — McKinsey, Goldman Sachs, Bain and Company, Merrill
Lynch”11 But venture firms rarely conduct campus recruitment
drives — the pace of hiring and volume of open positions is

-- 57 of 546 --

28 	Welcome to the land of ad-Venture
Interviewing for Your VC Position
Preparation:
• 	Investments: 	Research 	the 	venture 	firm’s 	profile.
Understand the sector and stage of investments, assets
under management, and its latest fund size.
• 	Look up the key portfolio companies, and map their
progress. Have these companies signed up strate-
gic partnerships? Have they raised follow-on rounds
of capital?
• 	Performance: Research any major exits.
• 	Philosophy and culture: Read the founders’ and senior
partners’ blogs. Understand their mind-set and phi-
losophies well.
• 	Reference checks: Call founders, co-investors, ex-
employees . . . get to the bottom of how the firm
treats people.
Examples of questions you can ask the venture firm:
1. What is the fund’s investment strategy?
• 	Of course, you have done your homework, checked
out the websites and online data sources. You
know the firm’s history and the background of
the founders.
• 	Research one or two specific investments, and
assess the competitive universe of similar invest-
ments made by other venture firms. Dive into the
investment rationale and find out why this oppor-
tunity was chosen over others.
• 	Ask how the fund’s investment strategy has evolved
over time. What challenges has the fund faced, if
any, in sourcing opportunities? In raising capital?
• 	Find out the life cycle of the current fund. All ven-
ture funds have a three- to five-year investment

-- 58 of 546 --

InternShIPS and camPuS recruItment 	29
period from the time the fund is raised. Thus,
depending on the timing of your entry, you could
be involved in making investments, managing the
portfolio, or preparing for the next fund raise.
2. What is a typical day at the firm? To whom would I
report, and what self-development opportunities exist
for an entry-level person?
• 	Look for opportunities where you will participate
in all facets of the business.
3. Is this a collaborative environment or a field of cow-
boys who thrive going solo? How do the team mem-
bers collaborate with each other, especially when the
portfolio companies are in trouble? When has the firm
let go of any staff, and why?
• 	Look for troubling situations. How were these
handled by the internal team? Be prepared to get
smooth-talked and do not believe everything you
hear. You will rarely hear honest statements like
“We screwed up on that investment” or the GP “is a
Machiavellian despot, who screams his head off and
throws things around, muttering obscenities.” Talk
to the industry peers and CEOs of portfolio com-
panies to get a true sense of the culture of the firm.
• 	Can you see yourself having fun with this team? A
beer on Friday night?
4. How will my performance be measured? Will we have
clear milestones established? Will I be able to measure
my own progress? Beware of any firm that does not
offer clarity in performance metrics, as ambiguity can
be used to hurt you.
5. At what point will I be eligible to be on a partner track?
In some firms, candidates are elevated to partner sta-
tus after successful exits, while in other firms, it’s a
function of time.

-- 59 of 546 --

30 	Welcome to the land of ad-Venture
low, and when a MBA graduate has significant student debt to
worry about, they are rarely picky.
Rajeev Batra, partner at the Mayfield Fund, says, “When
I was finishing up my MBA at Harvard, I was approached
by a few venture firms. I did not even realize I was being
interviewed till we met for the third time.” Rajeev had a few
entrepreneurial gigs, and a PhD in electrical engineering
Mind Your Language . . . and Your Handwriting
When Forbes profiled Arthur Rock, a young investment
manager in Boston, Dick Kramlich read the article with great
interest. Arthur was hiring. “Well, I’m gonna find a younger
partner . . .” Dick sat down and wrote him a longhand letter.
“I never had ever done anything like this before” he would
recall. “The following Monday I got a telephone call. “Mr.
Rock’s on the line.”
Arthur hired Dick shortly thereafter. “I found out there
were over a thousand responses to the article. And that
Arthur had a handwriting expert that analyzed my letter.
Isn’t that funny? So that’s how I got in the venture business.”
Later, Dick Kramlich went to found New Enterprise Associ-
ates (NEA), a multibillion-dollar global venture fund.
Terry McGuire, a venture capitalist of 25 years and
Emeritus Chairman of National Venture Capital Associa-
tion, spent a year in Ireland soon after college, where he
learned to speak Gaelic. Coincidentally, at his first job inter-
view, the interviewer spoke fluent Gaelic. He muttered,
“An bfhuil se fluic, amach?” which is Gaelic for “Is it wet
outside?” Terry promptly responded in Gaelic. The two hit
it off, and Terry landed the job. 13 But was it just a stroke
of luck? It certainly helped that Terry was the president of
the Harvard Business School Venture Capital Club. “It’s a
combination of training, the network, and opportunity that
presented itself,” says Terry. Terry went on to start Pola-
ris Ventures after a seven-year stint at this Chicago-based
venture firm.

-- 60 of 546 --

the felloWShIP of InVeStorS 	31
demonstrated his domain knowledge. “In my business school
essay, I had written that eventually, I wanted to be a venture
capitalist when I grow up,” he says.12
Candidates often underestimate the power of internship
opportunities. Many practitioners would be open to a thought-
ful email or a call along the lines of “Hi, I am graduating next
year and wanted to explore a summer internship. I have stud-
ied your investment thesis and have identified a few oppor-
tunities that may be of interest. Let me know if I can come by
and discuss these.” That kind of an opening gambit is bound
to get a response.
Often, those at a junior level may wonder if entrepreneurs
will engage with them. The debate is rife with opinions of a
thousand bloggers: entrepreneurs should only talk to those
professionals who can make decisions. While various blogs
emphasize the important attributes of the investor’s stature,
experience, decision-making abilities, or getting the deal
done, to get to the decision makers, the starting point is often
a junior person. Pat Grady, partner at Sequoia Capital for
over 12 years says, “When I joined Sequoia back in 2004, I
was the youngest in the firm but my title was partner. For
Sequoia, this was never about a ‘sourcing’ gimmick, making
sure that founders ‘talk only to partners’ hence this title. It
was a genuine intention to align everyone for the same out-
comes. We do not have hierarchies in this firm and we work
closely with each other.”
the felloWShIP of InVeStorS
For experienced professionals, the Kauffman Fellows Program
can be one potential path to enter the hallowed halls — a two-
year, hands-on training program designed by the VCs for the
VCs. The program offers structured learning opportunities
with evolving module to explore themes of innovation, invest-
ing, leadership, and self-awareness.
Punit Chiniwalla, MD, with a corporate venture firm pur-
sued the coveted Kauffman Fellows Program, which eventually

-- 61 of 546 --

32 	Welcome to the land of ad-Venture
Junior Partner, Hungry Partner
Paul Graham of Y Combinator writes, “Junior persons
scour the web looking for startups their bosses could
invest in. The junior people will tend to seem very posi-
tive about your company. They’re not pretending; they
want to believe you’re a hot prospect, because it would
be a huge coup for them if their firm invested in a com-
pany they discovered. Don’t be misled by this optimism.
It’s the partners who decide, and they view things with a
colder eye.”14
Peter Thiel, investor and entrepreneur, points out that
the junior person is often an advantageous starting point
for entrepreneurs. “Tactically, the first thing to do is find
someone who does need to make investments. That can
mean finding a senior associate or a principal for your
first pitch, not a senior partner. This contravenes the con-
ventional wisdom that holds that you should not pitch
to junior people. (“Don’t pitch someone who can’t write
a check themselves.”) That wisdom is wrong. Junior
people will give entrepreneurs a fair shake because they
need good deals to their name. If they don’t find those
deals, they won’t become senior, and they very much
want to become senior. So seek these people out: they
are motivated in a way more seasoned VCs are not. . . .
No senior VC needs to do an investment. You should
never forget that. Any senior VC that you’re talking to
is already wealthy and has many famous deals to show
for it. Your company is probably not going to make a
material difference to him but does present a significant
chance of adding to his workload and failure rate; there
will therefore be a certain amount of inertia against the
deal . . . on average most deals don’t pan out but do
take time. 15

-- 62 of 546 --

the felloWShIP of InVeStorS 	33
helped him land smack in the center of the hypercompetitive
venture universe of Sand Hill Road. Punit had made his first
investment at a university venture fund, even before he had
graduated from business school. This experience, combined
with a PhD, enabled Punit to land in the Kauffman Fellows
Program. After a brief stint on Sandhill Road, Punit manages
the US offices of an international corporate venture fund. The
much-sought-after program, whose mission is to “identify,
develop, and network emerging global leaders in venture
capital,”16 is a near-guaranteed entry ticket into the world of
venture capital.
While working full-time at a venture capital firm, each
Kauffman Fellow engages in a two-year, hands-on appren-
ticeship that includes professional coaching in seven mod-
ules, mentoring by seasoned venture partners, and triennial
sessions of industry and leadership curriculum. The program
claims that the fellowship’s value can be measured along three
axes of investing: apprenticeship, leadership development,
and being a part of a global network.
Each year, about 20 to 30 fellows are picked from a pool
of about 200 applicants. The application process is a two-step
dance, which is rigorous by any measure. The written applica-
tion and the interview — reviewers include leading venture
capitalists — look for a prior track record of accomplishments
that are significant. Entrepreneurial background trumps oper-
ational background; in fact, it trumps everything else.
At the interview stage, the universe of 200 applicants nar-
rows down by about a third. Each candidate is grilled by panels
of four to five venture capitalists. The next stage is the final-
ist stage, where candidates who cross the finish line are then
matched with firms who are seeking to bring on fresh talent. If
any firm does not pick up a finalist, the process ends. For those
selected, the sponsor venture capital firm pays a hefty tuition
in addition to the salary for the two-year internship. These
would-be Fellows are assigned mentors from established ven-
ture firms who, over the course of a two-year period, will pro-
vide insights and formal training into the art and science of
venture investing.

-- 63 of 546 --

34 	Welcome to the land of ad-Venture
Some of the common characteristics of Fellows include “a
bias toward entrepreneurs; deep scientific, technology, or busi-
ness domain expertise; an aspiration to contribute to the build-
ing of companies, either as an investor or as a startup leader; an
appetite for risk, ambiguity, and unstructured environments;
and humility, empathy, a sense of service, and unquestioned
integrity.” 17
adJacent entrY PoIntS
Getting in to a top-tier venture fund is tough. Yet, practitioners
have found ways to meet their career goals by starting in an
allied universe. These pathways are not as competitive, and
each one has its pros and cons. As they say, there is no straight
path into venture capital.
About 6 to 8 percent of all venture capital investments in
United States come from corporate venture capitalists (CVCs).
Besides a financial return, corporations invest in startups to
gain a view of the newest new thing. Corporate venture capi-
tal funds are sponsored by the mother ships to help generate
financial returns. Allied objectives for CVCs include iden-
tifying novel technologies to enhance revenue streams and
amplify a corporation’s competitive position. Other corporate
objectives include validation of new market segments as well
as leveraging relationships between the corporate venture cap-
ital portfolio and corporate business units. About 60 percent of
corporations invest in venture funds as LPs, and 90 percent of
CVCs invest directly in startups. Getting in a corporate venture
capital firm of repute such as Google Ventures or Intel Capital
can be a strong starting point for practitioners. Angel networks
also offer excellent opportunities to entry-level candidates and
are forgiving playgrounds where skills can be honed.
Opportunities in the institutional investor (LP) universe
can be a starting point. Pension funds — both private and pub-
lic — Fund-of-Funds, university endowments, foundations,
and insurance companies have to deploy assets in the universe

-- 64 of 546 --

adJacent entrY PoIntS 	35
of venture funds. Family offices also offer a strong starting
point for practitioners. These are addressed in greater detail
in Chapter 8.
Investment banking firms, law firms, marketing firms,
and even journalists have seen talent transition into ven-
ture capital.
from entrepreneur to Vc
The recent wave of investors has come from a demonstrated
entrepreneurial background. Having started a company, raised
capital, and generated an exit eminently qualifies you to serve
other entrepreneurs well. But that does not guarantee success
as an investor.
Exhibit 4.1 illustrates the pros and cons of each pathway.
Exhibit 4.1 Entry Points in Venture Capital.
Pathway 	Opportunities 	Challenges
Entrepreneurial/
startups
Engage with entrepreneurs.
Ability to understand value
drivers, technology challenges,
and team dynamics.
Shifting from player to coach — managing
temptation to jump in and drive when
companies underperform. Sector
expertise can be narrow. Pace can be
too slow. As one entrepreneur-turned-VC
remarked, “As a CEO, I was used to six
emergencies before 9 a.m. As a VC,
I am getting so bored and lazy.”
Investment banking/
consulting
Wider horizon of sector
knowledge and exposure
to opportunities
Lack of founder network/awareness
of investment dynamics/risk-taking
abilities
Corporate VC/
micro VCs/
angel networks
Develop investment experience,
sharpen due diligence abilities,
and establish track record
of investments
Differing agendas and conflicts. Investment
activities may be limited by corporate
agenda or angel interests. Speed of
decision-making can be a concern.
Institutional investors 	Ability to understand the
LP/investor perspectives.
Build relationships and have
knowledge of new funds.
Ability to time the entry.
Risk of being perceived as an asset
manager versus an investor. Number
of investments may be limited. Process
is often slow and involves buy-in from
various stakeholders.
Service providers 	Ability to function
as a resource to
entrepreneurs.
Lack of domain expertise, lack of deeper
understanding of financial dynamics.

-- 65 of 546 --

36 	Welcome to the land of ad-Venture
When Jan Garfinkle, founder of Arboretum Ventures Fund,
decided to be a venture capitalist, she polished her resume and
approached several early-stage venture funds. But every fund
turned her down. So she decided to start her own fund.
Jan had spent two decades cutting her teeth at two
venture-backed cardiovascular device companies. A large pub-
licly traded company acquired both these companies, leaving
Jan a bit richer, wiser, and hungrier. She started off as a prod-
uct manager with Advanced Cardiovascular Systems (ACS),
a forerunner in over-the-wire angioplasty — a technique that
reopens narrowed or blocked arteries in the heart (coronary
arteries) without major surgery. The founder of the company,
John Simpson, once remarked, “When we started the com-
pany, there was no interventional cardiology device sector.” 18
C. Richard (“Dick”) Kramlich, founder of NEA, had then
invested in Advanced Cardiovascular Systems. Dick once said
of ACS, “The procedure was entirely noninvasive . . . the body
didn’t have to go through the trauma it once had to endure.”19
At Advanced Cardiovascular Systems, Jan spent six years in
marketing and sales of angioplasty systems. When Eli Lilly
came knocking and acquired the company, the foundation
stone for Guidant Corporation was laid. “We were the largest
single shareholder in Advanced Cardiovascular Systems. . . .
The company did extremely well,”20 Kramlich would say. That
was over 25 years ago, when Jan was at the threshold of her
career. To be in an NEA-backed startup was certainly fortui-
tous for Jan’s career path.21
Like all good serial entrepreneurs, Jan moved on to John
Simpson’s next company, Devices for Vascular Intervention.
The same founder who had built Advanced Cardiovascular
Systems was now leading the charge in the next wave of the
cardiovascular sector. Devices for Vascular Intervention laid
its bets on atherectomy — a procedure to remove plaque from
arteries. Here, Jan wrote the first business plan, and over the
next six years, as director of marketing and clinical research,
she dove deeply into the universe of regulatory trials and
approvals. Again, Eli Lilly had been watching closely and came

-- 66 of 546 --

GettInG lucKY — When oPPortunItY meetS 	37
knocking at the door. These two companies acquired by Eli
Lilly became the foundation for Guidant Corporation, which
was eventually spun off by Eli Lilly as a separate company
and listed as GDT on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE).
Boston Scientific acquired Guidant in 2006 for $27.2 billion.
At that time, the vascular intervention business was valued at
$4.1 billion.22
When venture firms turned her down time and again, Jan
decided to do what any entrepreneur does — never take no for
an answer! She decided to raise her own fund and launched
Arboretum Ventures, a fund focused on early-stage health care
and medical device companies. Having lived close to Nichols
Arboretum in Ann Arbor, and with her own DNA of a nurtur-
ing type, she found the name to be the appropriate encapsula-
tion of her philosophies and style.
Like Jan, John Hummer, cofounder of Hummer- Winblad,
interviewed at five venture firms. “All five turned me
down — on the same day,” reminisces John with a smug smile.
John went on to start his own fund. “I climbed in from the
window, as most do to get in this business of venture capital,”
comments the towering John, who once was a professional
basketball player.
Most venture professionals agree that there is no straight
path into the business of venture capital. You have to climb in
from the window, if that’s what it takes! Jan and John were able
to raise their own funds: for others, the starting point is often at
an entry-level position.
GettInG lucKY — When oPPortunItY meetS
a PrePared mInd
For a few chosen practitioners, the entry into venture capital
was not an uphill crawl or a series of grueling interviews. It
was a calling — a blaring siren. Bryce Roberts was planning
to go to law school and in the interim decided to start a ski
company in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. “One of my neighbors,

-- 67 of 546 --

38 	Welcome to the land of ad-Venture
a venture capitalist, invited me to sit in on pitch meetings and
offer feedback,” he says. Bryce went on to be the co-founder
of O’Reilly Alphatec Ventures, which has led investments in a
number of prominent technology startups.
Jack Ahrens, co-founder of T-Gap Ventures, has been in the
venture business for over 30 years. While he was employed at
a bank in Illinois, one afternoon he stumbled upon an internal
memo that suggested his department was being shut down. “I
was irritated and told my boss I would be leaving.” His boss
promptly jumped in: “We have a venture capital arm — what
if we made you the president and gave you a raise?” “I took
it — I barely knew what the heck venture capital was, but here
I was a VC for three decades,” says Jack. In these three dec-
ades, Jack has led over 35 successful exits, including 20 IPOs.
Interestingly, neither Bryce nor Jack has the desire to grow his
fund size beyond what is manageable. My own observation is
that if they wished, they could easily raise a lot more capital
and increase their fund size, but so far they have curbed any
such inflated ambitions. For those who followed their calling,
the ability to find strong investment opportunities, generate
returns, and stay on the growth trajectory is not difficult.
There is no way of knowing whether you are a natural, as
Sanford Bernstein puts it. Bernstein, founder of the investment
banking firm Robertson Stephens and Company, had invested
in venture funds for 20 years. “Some do it, some can’t, and like
with athletes, there is no way of telling ’till they take the field,”
he once remarked.23
To prove they are good athletes, venture capitalists need
to pick good investment opportunities. John Doerr used to
say that training a new venture capitalist was not unlike pre-
paring a fighter pilot for battle. It takes six to eight years, and
you should be prepared for losses of about $20 million. 24 Yet
in its first fund, Hummer-Winblad invested in 17 companies,
of which 16 yielded a positive return. Jan Garfinkle’s Arbore-
tum Ventures Fund I had two exits in quick succession that
yielded strong returns — comfortably landing the fund in the
top quartile.

-- 68 of 546 --

GettInG lucKY — When oPPortunItY meetS 	39
It does help to have a reasonable measure of luck on your
side. When Jan Garfinkle decided to raise her first fund, Arbo-
retum Ventures, she met a leading LP over Chinese food to
discuss her game plan. The LP committed, and the fortune
cookie, now pasted in Jan’s journal, said, “You will soon get
something you’ve always wanted.” Fifteen years later, Jan is
raising her Fund V, which is 10 times the size of her Fund I.
When she launched her Fund I, she expressed the desire to
serve this industry and be on the board of the National Venture
Capital Association. 25 Ten years later, she served as the chair of
this association.
David Cowan of Bessemer Venture Partners adds it all up
nicely: “The one most important quality of a successful ven-
ture capitalist is luck.”26 Arthur Rock, who was an investor in
Apple, Intel, and some of the formative companies of the tech-
nology era, says, “You gotta be lucky. Everybody’s gonna be
lucky at some time or another. I was lucky to be lucky early in
my career.”27
In the business of venture capital, luck is necessary but not
a sufficient condition.

-- 69 of 546 --



-- 70 of 546 --

5
41
“Every discipline has its top 1 percent — how do the top
VCs operate? What can you learn from these — because, in
early years, you will fund companies you shouldn’t. You will
try to fix things you can’t,” says Mike Maples, founder of
Floodgate Fund.
BUILDING YOUR STRENGTHS
How does one build a career as an investor and rise to the top?
Making rational bets while being aware of psychological biases
and emotions is a good starting point. Whether you choose to
emulate the path of Bill Gurley, Brad Feld, or Warren Buffett or
follow the principles of Ray Dalio, there are no predetermined
paths, instant premix concoctions, formulas, or silver bullets.
When you develop your own views of this craft, you will stand
on a strong foundation.
• 	Build on first principles, not blind imitations. Elon Musk,
when forced to rethink the cost of building a $65 mil-
lion rocket, observed that the materials required to build
the rocket were only 2 percent of the overall costs. That
was the trigger for starting SpaceX. Scientists are often
trained to think along such lines, but the vast majority
rarely develop this skill. Indeed, thinking is the hardest
Developing Your
Investment Career

-- 71 of 546 --

42 	DEvELOpING YOUR INvESTmENT CaREER
part of our jobs, and very few people do it well. Most
of us imitate others, often without realizing it. Aristo-
tle’s view said, “In every systematic inquiry (methodos)
where there are first principles, or causes, or elements,
knowledge and science result from acquiring knowledge of
these; for we think we know something just in case we
acquire knowledge of the primary causes, the primary
first principles, all the way to the elements.” The Socratic
method of questioning (discussed in due diligence
section) can be applied here, where we ask ourselves,
“What data and evidence do I have — why do I think
this way?”
• 	Hang your observations together in simple mental mod-
els. Charlie Munger, investment partner at Berkshire
Hathaway, described mental models and frameworks
as follows: “The first rule is that you can’t really know
anything if you just remember isolated facts and try
and bang ’em back. If the facts don’t hang together on a
latticework of theory, you don’t have them in a usable form.
You’ve got to have models in your head. You’ve got
to hang experience on a latticework of models in your
head.” Mike Maples, Floodgate Fund, encourages inves-
tors to “Build your insight hypothesis on selections you
make — founders or companies.” For example, an obser-
vation can include a hypothesis like immigrant founders
are hungrier as they have burnt all bridges, hence they have a
higher chance of success. Or you could develop a hypoth-
esis around certain market segments, adoption patterns,
buyer behavior, and so on.
• 	Build your circle of competence using probabilistic thinking.
As investors, we can operate in some areas really well.
And we can do poorly if we try to get into every corner of
the marketplace. Because our entire business is based on
outcomes, we need to make quality decisions that sepa-
rate skill from luck. In her book Thinking in Bets, author
Annie Duke writes, “We are betting against future ver-
sions we are not choosing.” We suffer from hindsight

-- 72 of 546 --

BUILDING YOUR STRENGTHS 	43
bias (after the outcome is known, we of course knew it
to be inevitable) blind-spot bias (where we cannot see
our own bias and shortcomings), and self-serving bias
(attributing wins to skill and failures to luck). We need
to build a good process for decision-making. We gather
details, build our knowledge, but also are aware of what
we do not know. We apply uniform standards to data
and watch for conflicts and self-interest. In making ven-
ture investments, “we should understand the power
law,” Mike Maples reminds us. The power law states
that outsized returns come from a handful of companies
while the vast majority of investments yield an average
outcome. “How can we know which risks are worth tak-
ing? I passed on Airbnb — what questions should I have
asked instead?” he says.
• 	Study game theory. In the game of VC, you have com-
peting investors, follow-on and strategic investors,
founders, competition, partners . . . the whole gaggle
where interests can diverge. As the simplistic defini-
tion of game theory goes, you are trying to predict the
next move in any strategic interaction between multiple
players where everyone knows the rules and outcomes.
What Makes a Good Investor?
Personality, Brains, Energy
For a venture capitalist, I think you want brain power and
you want energy and you want personality. Want some-
body who is going to attract people . . . It goes without
saying you want somebody dead honest, and you want
somebody that’s got really good ethics, and you want
somebody who’s got a strong sense of pride in getting the
job done. And then I didn’t mention the analytical side. . . .1
—William Draper III, founder,
Sutter Hill Ventures

-- 73 of 546 --

44 	DEvELOpING YOUR INvESTmENT CaREER
Game theory can be a powerful tool to understand pos-
sible outcomes where you sort out messy situations. You
often have the following dynamics at work:
• 	Game: Any set of circumstances that has a result
dependent on the actions of two of more decision
makers (players). Assume the CEO and the
board/investors are players, aiming for a certain
outcome.
• 	Players: A strategic decision maker within the con-
text of the game. In VC, the primary players (CEO,
board) as well as secondary players (competition,
regulatory forces) can impact the outcomes.
• 	Information: All sides have varying, and partial,
information of the state of the business, market,
competitive dynamics and moves being plotted.
• 	Strategy: Actions and circumstances that might arise
along the way.
• 	Outcomes: Win, lose, or continue to build — these
dynamics can vary with any number of moves made
by the players.
Though performance matters, politics and power dynamics
can kill you. Many VC careers have died a premature
death, thanks to ego, greed, and politics. While you
may be innocent, know that this is a high-stakes game.
Self-preservation and “jumping in front of the right
deal/parade” occurs all the time. One investor reminds
us that you have to earn your political capital in any
firm — know who is in charge and understand the
power dynamics. You could be the smartest person with
top-decile returns, but if they don’t like you, they will
find a way to kick you out. In another firm, a young
but insecure power-hungry partner played diabolical
moves and eliminated a senior partner because he felt
threatened. The senior partner had a proven track record,
strong network of relationships, and could source better

-- 74 of 546 --

BUILDING YOUR STRENGTHS 	45
opportunities. But he was eliminated because, according
to the party line, he was not a “team player” and did not
follow the firm’s “culture and processes.” “I had to make a
decision — should I keep my $500,000 a year position
to become a lap dog? I chose self-respect and peace-of-
mind instead. . . .” this GP bemoaned.
Let us look at two examples where investors were able to
build their venture careers rapidly.
How to Hit the Ground Running
Foundation Capital, a Silicon Valley venture firm with two dec-
ades of investments in companies such as Netflix, Uber, Chegg,
and Graphcore, was getting ready to raise its next fund — the
ninth fund since it started in the late 1990s. The firm had sur-
vived and thrived across major innovation and economic
cycles such as the emergence of the World Wide Web and the
dot-com bubble, Web 2.0 and the mobile revolution, the rise
of Big Data, software’s ascension to the cloud, and the birth of
blockchain. As the technology waves evolved, the three senior
partners at the firm were eager to recruit the next generation of
the investment team. Fund IX focused on enterprise software,
finance, and consumer and marketplace opportunities. One of
the candidates it homed in on was a rising star in cybersecurity
investments, Sid Trivedi. For Foundation Capital, cybersecu-
rity had been a lucrative arena. As the firm continued to build
on its successes, it needed some fresh blood. With his invest-
ment experience of three years, Sid brought a healthy blend
of insights, self-confidence, and more importantly, a growing
network of over a hundred executives in the cybersecurity
universe. During his interview, one of the senior partners at
Foundation Capital asked him that dreaded curveball ques-
tion: “Give me the names of five people you know well in three cat-
egories — prospective founders, current founders, and investors. Tell
me why you picked them and how you got to know them.”

-- 75 of 546 --

46 	DEvELOpING YOUR INvESTmENT CaREER
A quintessential networker, Sid walked up to the white-
board and put down names in each of the three categories.
The senior partner then picked five names from this list of
15 and asked for an introduction. In the meantime, the rest
of the team at Foundation Capital engaged with Sid for over
25 hours, conducted over a dozen reference calls (several of
them were blind checks), and could see the potential edge Sid
brought to the team. Soon after, Sid had an offer from Foun-
dation Capital. “Besides having developed a point-of-view in
cybersecurity, I can help our portfolio companies secure their
first dozen customers quickly. For any founder, that can be an
advantage,” says Sid.
Soon after joining the firm, Sid hosted a dinner with secu-
rity founders, buyers, and professionals. The guest speaker,
a chief technology officer of a publicly traded company with
over a hundred-billion-dollar market cap, sat down to have
a fireside chat with Sid. For the founders who attended, the
value of the investor and the firm was evident — access to a
potential customer and seasoned security investors who had
invested across multiple cycles and their views on market
trends and challenges. Within six months of joining the firm,
Sid was able to close on his first investment — a security team
had spun out from a multibillion-dollar networking company
to develop the next-generation AI-driven security platform.
“In our business, feedback cycles are long, as it takes 10 years
to realize returns. In the meantime, I have developed the mus-
cle of seeking constant feedback from my partners, founders,
and peers in the business. Gotta get better every day to stay
ahead in this game.”
moon Shots in Emerging Technology — Bets
in Quantum Computing
The arc of Andrew Schoen’s VC career begins with Sid, where
he founded the Cornell University’s Venture Club to gain
exposure to the world of venture capital. Young MBA stu-
dents could work alongside seasoned investors and learn the

-- 76 of 546 --

BUILDING YOUR STRENGTHS 	47
craft, hone their skills. As Andrew and Sid built the club, they
engaged with leading firms such as Sequoia, Bessemer, and
others who came in to work on projects with the students. With
the ringside view of the venture world, both of them were able
to find an entry point.
Soon after graduation Andrew, who has spent five years
at the multibillion-dollar venture firm New Enterprise Associ-
ates (NEA), moved to Beijing, China, for three years. There, he
was able to build out the portfolio and subsequently moved to
New York, where he set up the firm’s East Coast offices. “The
job of a venture capitalist is to identify and invest in opportu-
nities with immense potential — ours is distinctly a mission of
value creation (as opposed to value capture). We foster innova-
tion that occurs in leaps and bounds, with progress that looks more
like a step-function graph than a straight line,” he writes.2 One
of the companies Andrew led an investment in is a category
defining opportunity in quantum computing. With the end of
Moore’s law in sight, we need a punctuation mark in the path
of semiconductor development. For Andrew, this is a moon
shot, but as a first mover, he was able to study the entire land-
scape of opportunities in quantum computing and make a bet
on an opportunity that has significant potential.
For him, it’s not the risk that matters but the scale of the
outcome. As he muses:
For investors who are able to lean in with their eyes wide
open and fully understand the bet, an investment in quantum
computing could be a moon shot worth taking. A moon shot
can go awry. But venture capitalists make moon shot invest-
ments when they are convinced that the potential rewards
outweigh the risks. The question is not whether investments
will be made in quantum computing. Multiple govern-
ments around the world, and multiple government agencies
domestically, are already directing funds and technical
efforts toward this challenge. Several private investments
have already been made in the field. The question is whether
the rewards will be worth the financial risk, and the wait.

-- 77 of 546 --

48 	DEvELOpING YOUR INvESTmENT CaREER
BEWaRE: BIaS aND pSYCHOLOGY
The Misconception. You calculate what is risky or
rewarding and always choose to maximize gains while
minimizing losses.
The Truth. You depend on emotions to tell you is
something is good or bad, greatly overestimate the
rewards, and tend to stick to your first impressions.
–David McRaney, Author of
You Are Not So Smart
Every practitioner should aim to be a student of human
psychology and behavior. We are primal beings and we func-
tion in ways that cannot be fully explained within the logical
construct. This section addresses a few challenges that are
likely to occur while making investment decisions, primarily
due to randomness of human psychology and emotions.
Let’s start with David McRaney’s observation that we are
not as smart as we think we are. His book points out as many
as 48 ways we delude ourselves. But for the sake of brevity,
let’s focus on the few that are relevant in the context of venture
capital investments.
What Makes a Good Investor?
Comfort Ambiguity, Uncertainty, and Change
Good instinct, well-honed by experience, makes a good
venture capitalist. The most difficult part is dealing with
uncertainty.3
—C. Richard Kramlich, chairman and co-founder,
New Enterprise Associates
See, venture capital is very reducible to a few words. You
have to be interested in managing change, and you have to
recognize that change is necessary.4
—Donald T. Valentine, founder,
Sequoia Capital

-- 78 of 546 --

BEWaRE: BIaS aND pSYCHOLOGY 	49
• 	Emotions versus logic. In any investment decisions,
practitioners 	create 	elaborate 	logical 	labyrinths 	to
minimize risk or justify actions — but as human beings,
we have equal parts emotion. Or mostly emotions,
if you start to scratch beneath the surface. We have a
tendency to ignore odds in our favor and often rely
on gut feelings. Snap judgments. Love at first sight.
You had me at hello. . . . we could go on and on. At
work, we do stuff because we like someone. We want
to earn points or be liked. Or we want to reciprocate, to
feel good about ourselves. Research shows that when
What Makes a Good Investor?
A Good Therapist
The part that is really overlooked is that a VC needs to be a
good therapist. Any CEO will tell you that it’s the loneliest
job in the world. You have to lead, be upbeat and confi-
dent . . . every CEO has doubts of hitting the next milestone,
the next customer or the next capital raise. A good VC is
someone who can host an open, transparent discussion
and even give them a pep talk. At times, the founders get at
each other’s throats. It’s very easy for VCs to get prescrip-
tive and that’s not helpful — what is helpful is giving them
the tools to manage the issues and become stronger.5
—Rob Hayes, managing partner,
First Round Capital
You’ve got to be a good listener. I find if the venture
capitalist does all the talking, he doesn’t learn very much
about the people he’s thinking about investing in. Very
important to listen . . . and judge who looks and feels like
they have the makings to be a real company. Eventually it
becomes instinct if you do it often enough.6
—Paul “Pete” Bancroft, former CEO
of Bessemer Securities, former chairman
of National Venture Capital Association

-- 79 of 546 --

50 	DEvELOpING YOUR INvESTmENT CaREER
it comes to identifying risk, our brains are hardwired
to respond from the gut. Investor Chris Sacca one said,
“Never forget that underneath all the math and the MBA
bullshit talk, we are all still emotionally driven human
beings. We want to attach ourselves to narratives. We
don’t act because of equations. We follow our beliefs.
We get behind leaders who stir our feelings. If you find
someone diving too deep into the numbers, that means
they are struggling to find a reason to deeply care
about you.” 7
In his book How We Decide, Author Jonah Lehrer
points out that “our best decisions are a finely tuned
blend of both feeling and reason — and the precise mix
depends on the situation.” Now, there is nothing wrong
in healthy emotions but as students of human behavior,
we need to recognize that sometimes, it’s not necessarily
logic that’s at work. Without emotion, it becomes incred-
ibly difficult to settle on any one opinion. We would end-
lessly pore over variables and weigh the pros and cons
in an endless cycle of computations, writes McRaney.8
Thus, in any situation where the decisions don’t add up,
know that emotions, not logic, may be at work.
• 	Reciprocation, obligations and indebtedness. In a classic
book on human psychology, Influence — Science and
Practice, author Robert Cialdini writes that reciprocity is
one of the most widespread and basic norms of human
culture. Quite simply put, reciprocity is exchange — if
someone wishes you well on your birthday, you do the
same on theirs. Holiday cards, dinner invitations, horse-
trading where politicians vote on bills just because the
other politician supported their bill. Lobbyists play this
game pretty well. Pharmaceutical companies are espe-
cially notorious, and curry favors at the cost of innocent
patients — leading 	doctors 	snag 	“consulting 	agree-
ments” or paid vacations to Hawaii, where they are
gently reminded to prescribe more medication. It even
extends to international aid. So why is this relevant to
venture capital investments?

-- 80 of 546 --

BEWaRE: BIaS aND pSYCHOLOGY 	51
Most 	venture 	capitalists 	have 	relationships —
professional investors who are often aligned philo-
sophically, intellectually. Such investors often syndicate
investments, and may have made (or lost) money, stand-
ing side by side. If a VC “refers” or “brings you in” on
a deal, this ritual of reciprocity starts. This creates a web
of obligations that you may not necessarily be aware
of. But this obligatory dynamic could very well impact
decisions. The best antidote for such behavior is to raise
it upfront, at the time of investment, and put it bluntly
to investors: “Knowing that you have a longstanding
relationship and a history of working together, it could
work well in our advantage. How do we make sure this
opportunity stands strong on its merits and our emo-
tions do not hurt us?”
• 	A VC with ego — Why should I eat your leftovers? VCs tend
to compete, often mindlessly. Paul Graham, founder
of Y Combinator, one of the world’s leading accelera-
tors, writes:
A while ago, an eminent VC firm offered a series A round
to a startup we’d seed funded. Then they heard a rival VC
firm was also interested. They were so afraid that they’d be
rejected in favor of this other firm that they gave the startup
what’s known as an “exploding term sheet.” They had, I
think, 24 hours to say yes or no, or the deal was off. What
surprised me was their reaction when I called to talk about
it. I asked if they’d still be interested in the startup if the rival
VC didn’t end up making an offer, and they said no. What
rational basis could they have had for saying that? If they
thought the startup was worth investing in, what difference
should it make what some other VC thought? Surely it was
their duty to their limited partners simply to invest in the
best opportunities they found; they should be delighted if
the other VC said no, because it would mean they’d over-
looked a good opportunity. But of course, there was no
rational basis for their decision. They just couldn’t stand the
idea of taking this rival firm’s rejects.9

-- 81 of 546 --

52 	DEvELOpING YOUR INvESTmENT CaREER
• 	Pain + Reflection = Progress. One of Ray Dalio’s principles
is often quoted but rarely practised in the business of
venture capital. VCs often talk about pattern-matching for
success. But pattern-matching for failure is rare. Losses are
often buried deep and quick, unless you need a favorable
tax treatment. Logos vanish from websites and LinkedIn
profiles. In a business where speed and “hit-rates” matter,
the LPs suffer the pain, while GPs rarely reflect. Nor do
LPs ask questions about lessons learned. Getting inside
a “hot fund” matters more. Asking tough questions may
not yield access to the elite funds. Venture investing still
remains a game of hit-or-miss, with more losses than
hits. But as VCs, we do injustice to our own ethos when
we do not reflect on our own losses and mistakes. How
will our hit-ratios ever improve? One VC told me about
their first loss — it occurred when they got a call at 10
p.m. from a portfolio CEO. “I cannot do this anymore,”
said this exhausted, overworked, underappreciated, and
totally burnt-out CEO. The VC reflected that they had not
worked hard enough to understand the CEO’s personal
challenges. And it was too late to offer support now,
when the CEO had pulled the plug. Another VC’s loss
occurred when a company ran out of cash. In this case,
the CEO was a quintessential salesman who could get
orders but did not understand the implications of poor
cash management, leading to a flameout. The VC blamed
it on their own rushed fervor to invest in this company.
Speed, trust, blind optimism can destroy any portfolio
quickly. And therein lie the root causes of all investment
losses. To address these, following a radically open-
minded decision-making process can help.
• 	Decisions, biases, and harmful emotions. In the VC business,
we often make rapid decisions with limited knowledge.
Ray Dalio’s fundamental decision-making principle asks
to build deeper knowledge sets with utmost humility. In
practicing humility, we assume we are not as smart (as we
think we may be). If we reach out to as many people to gather
as much data, we might make better-informed decisions.

-- 82 of 546 --

BEWaRE: BIaS aND pSYCHOLOGY 	53
What Makes a Good Investor?
Good Judgment
VC doesn’t necessarily take technical talent — it doesn’t
hurt — but it’s more about people skills and the ability to
assess whether there’s a market for something,
—C. Richard Kramlich, founder,
New Enterprise Associates (NEA). 10
They see into the future, and they see what I call “situa-
tional awareness.” A lot of good venture capitalists, most
venture capitalists — the good ones — can walk into just
about any kind of meeting and, in about five minutes,
figure out who’s doing what to whom and exactly what
the issues are, sort of cut through it and figure out what’s
going on . . . You sort of look at a given situation and
project its trajectory reasonably well.11
—James R. Swartz, founder,
Accel Partners
It really pays off to come into [venture capital] after
you’ve had a fair amount of experience doing something
else. I think it’s a business that you’re probably better off
entering in your thirties and forties than you are entering
it in your twenties, because you need to build a frame of
reference by which to judge people and to judge opportu-
nities and to be able to judge markets and what’s going on
in the economy.12
—Reid Dennis, founder, Institutional
Venture Partners
Venture capitalists should guide companies based on real-world
experience . . . if you had a good marketing job at Intel, that
beats an MBA. An MBA is a little bit general for the venture
business. . .. The partners [at our firm] can say to entrepreneurs,
“We’ve been where you’re going,” and really mean it.13
—William K. Bowes Jr., founder,
US Venture Partners

-- 83 of 546 --

54 	DEvELOpING YOUR INvESTmENT CaREER
We should often ask, “How do I know I am right?” VCs
only know if they are right after a longer period — say,
five years, when portfolio companies succeed or die. But
we can ask this question at every stage of our investment
process. All investors go through two phases — gathering
information and conducting analysis — before we commit.
During these phases, a lot of opinions clash with facts.
And we can be rushed into saying yes or no. Emotions and
impulses can drive this instead of knowledge, data, and
analytical skills. To develop and follow a rigorous weighted
and probabilistic model of decision-making is not easy.
Brian Armstrong, CEO of Coinbase, has written a post
about an anonymized decision-making framework that
can bring a level of discipline in any politically charged,
ego-driven process. Such an approach can reduce the
role of harmful emotions in decision-making. Ego, greed,
status-plays, and one-upmanship are rife in the VC busi-
ness. Our own psychological biases will never vanish
completely, but at least we can become more self-aware.
The notion of radical transparency may seem idealistic
but needs to be inculcated in our lives.
• 	Conformity (or groupthink). In groups, we like to conform
rather than act independently. Time and again, studies
have shown that our behavior changes, at times dramat-
ically, when we are in groups. This might explain why
you have some investors who say one thing in a one-
on-one session but change their views when they are
in a group. This is group dynamics at work — people
don’t usually want to be seen as renegades. Conform-
ity is default behavior in human beings indeed, as it is
seen as essential to survival in tribal contexts. McRaney
points out that our desire for conformity is strong and
unconscious — like the desire to keep everyone happy
around a dinner table. But beware the dark place conform-
ity can lead to — dishonesty. If you see groupthink and
weak spines around the table, raise your hand and ask,
“Are we conforming to look good to each other? Or do
each of us believe this is a good decision?”

-- 84 of 546 --

BEWaRE: BIaS aND pSYCHOLOGY 	55
The other interesting aspect of group dynamics is
that it can decrease the quality of decisions, writes Dan
Ariely in his book, The (Honest) Truth about Dishonesty.
We have all seen this happen in large organizations
and government entities: it’s called bureaucracy, and it
results in decisions being made via the lowest-common-
denominator approach. No one gets fired. It’s all good,
but nothing ever gets done. It is rare for such a challenge
to occur in a startup, but be watchful.
• 	Halo effect: Hero worship. Every business has its heroes. The
lead singer of the rock band U2, Bono is a venture capi-
talist with TPG Growth and Elevation Partners. While
we have not seen such star power in a startup’s board-
room, it would be fun to speculate what a board meet-
ing would be like. Bono walks in, sits down, removes his
shades and says in his gravelly husky voice, ”We really
should move away, really, really move away from that
strategy.” Would there be a chorus of “ayes” followed
by, “And now can we get your autograph, picture, and a
hug?” We often subconsciously gravitate toward people
who look like us, who agree with or compliment us, or
are physically attractive, writes author Robert Cialdini.
It’s called similarity, compliance, association, and coop-
eration. Such psychological nuances often make one
board member persuasive over others, creating a halo
effect. These aspects of human behavior may be espe-
cially troubling in the context of a venture capital. While
these cannot be avoided, we need to recognize them and
make sure that we can tackle them effectively. Watch for
pandering when one board member excessively grovels
at the feet of another VC demigod. They are setting the
stage for groupthink.
• 	Networks: That overhyped Rolodex is not as useful as you
think. VCs may have 1000+ connections on LinkedIn but
a human brain only has the capacity to keep track of
about 150 connections. Beyond that, it’s all a pile of data.
Research shows that the size of our brain determines the

-- 85 of 546 --

56 	DEvELOpING YOUR INvESTmENT CaREER
size of our “active” network, where we maintain these
relationships in a meaningful fashion. And our prefron-
tal cortex can process only about 150 connections. Noted
author Malcolm Gladwell pointed out in The Tipping
Point that productivity declines once the size of the com-
pany grows beyond 150 people. 14 In such networks, the
grease of information and activities — getting together
for a beer, a hike, or a game — keeps it running smoothly.
The power of reciprocity works well and the network is
alive. But if we try to expand the network without being
able to nourish it meaningfully, the ability to impact and
reciprocate in such a network crumbles. Bottom line:
Don’t believe in your own ability to tap in your 1,000+
LinkedIn contacts — keep your expectations low.
What Makes a Good Investor?
A Guarded Optimist
You have to believe that the world can change. . .be opti-
mistic and at the same time, be realistic and guarded, not
romantic.15
—Terry McGuire, Co-Founder, Polaris
Ventures, and former Chairman of the National
Venture Capital Association
The goal of this chapter is to help practitioners improve
their game while appreciating the softer undertones of how
we behave. We are complex, emotional beings, each motivated
by different drivers and insecurities. Is your investment deci-
sion driven by independent, honest analysis and supported by
facts? As investor Peter Thiel points out, “Humans are mas-
sively cognitively biased in favor of near-term thinking. VCs
are no different.” 16

-- 86 of 546 --

6
57
CHALLENGES OF A VC CAREER
Steve Jobs was not impressed by venture capitalists and once
said of VC that it “sounds like a bullshit job to me.” 1 Ironically,
this was reported by none other than Sir Michael Moritz, who
was then a journalist and would become a venture capitalist
and chairman of Sequoia Capital. Of his own experiences as a
VC, he would say, “Every day is composed of a hundred soap
operas — it’s an exhilarating place to live and work.”2
As a venture capitalist, you are not creating anything
new, but rather fueling the creation of new innovations and
businesses. Often regarded as a commodity, a VC is often
compared to a role of a slick, glorified financier — most of
whom take credit for the entrepreneur’s successes and hide
their losses or blame them on others. On the other hand,
some practitioners find a way to take credit for all success-
ful outcomes.
This chapter looks at a few challenges of being a venture
capitalist.
Emotionally and Intellectually Demanding, a Business
of Thousand Nos
The business calls for a mental tenacity — not becoming
exhausted by the times you must say no to entrepreneurs,
A Business Where Enemies
Accumulate

-- 87 of 546 --

58 	A BuSINESS WHERE ENEmIES ACCumuLATE
turn people down, or turn someone’s great idea down without
being abrasive. Roelof Botha, Partner at Sequoia Capital says:
Friends come and go; enemies accumulate. At Sequoia, we
meet with thousands of companies every year, and only
partner with 15–20. That’s thousands of interactions where
we run the risk of making a negative impression. Regardless
of whether we end up partnering with them, we always
want founders to know we respect them and their ideas. I’m
mindful of how I treat people and I think about the long-term
consequences of my interactions. The people we meet with
will tell others about their experience, good or bad.
To handle multiple investment opportunities and com-
plex situations; to maintain your drive and discipline; to
prioritize tasks; and to be comfortable with ambiguity are
the hallmarks of this profession. “I have stopped trying to
Source: Bob Mankoff/Cartooncollections

-- 88 of 546 --

CHALLENGES OF A VC CAREER 	59
manage my calendar,” says Jack Ahrens, a VC of 30 years.
“Rather, I keep a prepared mind for emergencies that may
arise on any day.”
High Level of Churn
Once you get in, staying in the business of venture capital is
easy only as long as you can generate superior returns. Suc-
cessful practitioners continuously need to adapt themselves
to economic cycles. Besides performance, the business is rife
with partnership challenges, greed, and politics. Often, people
leave and firms fall apart.
Performance of Partner
The one and only measure of the business is financial
returns. Returns are a function of capital invested and time.
Time is your enemy. As the clock keeps ticking, the meas-
ure of performance — internal rate of return (IRR), which
is a function of time — keeps dropping. Worse, in bad mar-
kets and recessionary times, the ability to exit an investment
slows down, not to mention the potential value of the return.
But investors really don’t care for any excuses. When asked
what keeps him up at night, Roelof Botha of Sequoia Capital
said, “Suffice it to say that you’re only as good as your next
investment.” 3
Performance of Funds
In a world of one-hit wonders, consistency matters. Top-tier
venture capitalists who generate returns get to raise their next
funds quickly and charge higher profits — as much as 30 per-
cent, as opposed to the standard 20 percent. Marc Andreessen
once said, “I don’t believe there is such a thing as a VC indus-
try. There are about 40 firms that really do well as investors
and over 600 firms that will break your heart as an investor. A
handful of firms generate all the returns and a lot of firms want
to generate those returns.”4

-- 89 of 546 --

60 	A BuSINESS WHERE ENEmIES ACCumuLATE
market Forces
At times, changes in market trends can hurt highly special-
ized firms. Not too long ago, clean-tech investments were at
an all-time high. As the waves receded, the green practitioners
had to tweak their resumes. Some repositioned themselves as
generalists. Others went back into the technology sector and
sought “clean web” opportunities. Often, when technology/
software investments are on the upswing, life science sectors
take a beating. Technology sectors have a shorter path to exit,
while the time horizon of life sciences investments is longer,
often mired with technological, regulatory, and financial risks.
No Payday
Of the 8,000 practitioners in the business in the United States, very
few have seen any financial profits, or as they say, a “carry check.”
In other words, most practitioners have survived on salaries com-
ing from management fees. This is yet another cause of heartburn
for VCs who feel frustrated that their bets have not paid off fast
enough, and for limited partners (LPs), who think incentives are
misaligned when VCs get paid fees for poor performance. One
investor with over nine years of experience says, “We need to
own up to the fact that there may never be a big payday.”
Ego, Greed, and Intellectual Dishonesty
Any LP will regale you with stories of bad VC behavior. But
at its very core, what irritates these investors is how VCs play
around with numbers to bloat their performance. It’s an age-old
tactic: slice and dice the data to make sure your performance
The Business of Home Runs
Only a small number of startups are meant to be success-
ful. The same goes for venture firms. I expect most VCs to
fail. The entire business is about finding exceptional, awe-
some companies. If you find one of them every five years,
nothing else matters.
—Mike Maples, Floodgate Fund5

-- 90 of 546 --

VC CAREER AS A CALLING 	61
looks good and then find the next sucker who can invest in the
fund. VCs, with their inflated egos, hubris, and biases, rarely do
a mea culpa. No VC in their right mind will say, “We lost your
money and we learned a few lessons.” Often, VCs find some-
one to blame for poor performance. Several limited partners
described this behavior as disingenuous. A fund of funds (FoF)
summarized it as the Lake Wobegon6 effect, where in a VC land,
all the women are strong, all the men are good looking, and all
the children [and all the venture capitalists] are above average.
VC CAREER AS A CALLING
The VC business is subject to pressures from multiple ends:
the supply of capital, the availability of investment opportuni-
ties, liquidity time frames, and regulatory dynamics. Elizabeth
“Beezer” Clarkson, managing director of Sapphire Ventures
Fund-of-Funds, says, “Often, you don’t know if it’s you or its
luck. Having humility is essential.”
In any career where those two imposters of fame and for-
tune prevail, you can be assured of petty politics, backstabbing,
and opportunistic behavior. Ego, greed, and hubris have often
turned practitioners into primal beings — ask any founder and
they will share plenty of VC horror stories.
At its core, venture capital is truly an apprenticeship
business. It takes years of mentoring to learn how to assess
Being Reasonably Nice Can Be a Competitive Advantage
I’ve heard entrepreneurs say, “I don’t want to talk to that
firm because they are such jerks.” In almost all cases, these
are well-known, older firms who come from the era when
capital was scarce.
Every experienced entrepreneur I know has a list of
‘toxic’ VCs they won’t deal with. There are still plenty
of VCs to pitch to get a fair price for your company and
only deal with decent, helpful investors. It sounds kind
of crazy, but being a reasonably nice person has become a
competitive advantage in venture capital.
—Chris Dixon, partner, Andreessen Horowitz7

-- 91 of 546 --

62 	A BuSINESS WHERE ENEmIES ACCumuLATE
investment opportunities, set pricing, and strategy, build and
motivate management teams, deal with inevitable and unpre-
dictable threats to the businesses, source additional capital and
strategic partners, and finally, divest (for better or worse) these
illiquid investments. “The good ones view it as a calling, not
a career,” says Diana Frazier of FLAG Capital Management, a
fund of funds.
Singer Bob Dylan once said, “I accept chaos. I’m not sure it
accepts me.” That sums it up nicely — you can accept venture
capital, but will it accept you?

-- 92 of 546 --

7
63
“Succession in venture funds is like a Shakespearean tragedy —
it involves money, ego, fame, and emotion,” says Paul Holland
of Foundation Capital. Some describe the adrenaline-laden
world of venture investments as in the song “Hotel California” —
where you can check out any time you like, but you can
never leave.
Hanging out with cool kids, doling out large sums of
money, playing rich Daddy power trips, and feeling mighty
invincible can be heady. Yet how best should you plan to get
out? And where do you go from the world of venture — where
you get to see a thousand great startups each year? Most career
paths sound mildly interesting after venture, and worse, you
might be ill-qualified to do any meaningful operational role.
MANAGING SUCCESSION - NOW MY WORK IS DONE
Succession and generational transfers in venture firms is
hard — nearly impossible. When firms are successful in gen-
erating returns, ego and greed take over. Rainmakers and top
performers get the “God” syndrome, and they are the ones
carrying the weight of this world, while others are socialists.
Even the legendary investor Warren Buffett has not been able
to find a suitable replacement to run Berkshire Hathaway and
continues to run the firm at the age of 89. But Sequoia Capital
Generational Transfer
and Succession

-- 93 of 546 --

64 	GENERAtIONAl tRANSfER AND SUCCESSION
has mastered the art of passing the baton to the next genera-
tion without missing a beat — over the past nearly 50 years,
Sequoia has done it not once, but twice.
When Don Valentine decided to start a venture firm in
1972, he did not call it “Valentine Capital” — partly because he
wanted the firm to last well beyond his years. The California
coast is abundant with Sequoia trees, an evergreen variety, typ-
ically living 1,200–1,800 years, among the oldest living things
and also one of the tallest trees on Earth. That sounded like an
apt name for the firm he had in mind. For five years, he ran
the firm largely by himself, making investments in early-stage
technology companies.
Pat Grady, who co-leads Sequoia’s Growth business, a
role he assumed as part of the firm’s most recent generational
transfer, describes the firm’s first succession — the transi-
tion of Sequoia Capital from Don Valentine to Sir Michael
Moritz and Doug Leone. Pat says that Don walked in one
morning and sat down with Sir Michael and Doug. “He pulls
out this sheet of paper. He had made notes in two separate
columns — duties he could do and duties he no longer wanted to
do. He asked them to make a checkmark next to those duties
they would still like Don to do. Then he said, all of this is now
yours.” Pat chokes up as he recalls Don’s words, “But make
sure when you leave the firm, it is in a better place than when
you took over Sequoia.”
Within months, the worst public market debacle occurred
when the internet dotcom bubble burst of the year 2000, leav-
ing behind some deep losses. Both Moritz and Leone were
proven investors, having returned investor capital multiple
times over. “It would have been an easy decision for Sequoia
to hide behind the fact that everyone in the market lost their
shirt. But that’s not the spirit — Doug and Sir Michael fought
for every inch and made our investors whole.” Sequoia has
never lost money for its investors. They did not let the Don
down — on performance or generational transfer. They built
a team, and when the time came, Moritz and Leone would go
on to pass on the baton to Jim Goetz, who would remind other

-- 94 of 546 --

MANAGING SUCCESSION - NOW MY WORK IS DONE 	65
Generational Transfer at Sequoia:
Letter to LPs
Subject: Time to pay it forward
Disruption is at the heart of our business. It’s what creates
opportunities for Sequoia entrepreneurs, and it’s what helps
them produce extraordinary returns for our LPs. Ironically,
it’s also the force that many venture capital firms resist, often
contributing to their own decline.
Sequoia is the exception.
Over the past 45 years, starting with Don Valentine,
Sequoia has embraced change as much within our partnership
as outside it. That willingness to renew and reinvent — often
by empowering the less experienced among us — has been
the foundation of our success. I am deeply indebted to Doug
and Sir Michael for the trust they placed in me, first as a
Sequoia-backed entrepreneur, later as co-lead of the venture
business, and more recently as a Sequoia Steward. Implicit in
that arc is an obligation to pay it forward to the next genera-
tion. That time has come.
During the coming week, I plan to step aside from my
leadership responsibilities. I do so with great confidence in
this next generation of leaders. They represent a gifted cohort
who bleed Sequoia, and their fresh ideas will spur the next
wave of reinvention. More to come on these well-deserved
changes from Doug.
To ensure a smooth transition and encourage change,
I am going to decamp from the Menlo office for a few months.
I will remain a GP in existing funds and continue to represent
Sequoia on boards. When I return, I intend to sponsor new
investments, but I plan to reduce my workload, so that I can
start saying “yes” to some of the other aspects of my life that
have been on hold over the past twenty years.
Forever grateful.
JJG
(Jim Goetz)

-- 95 of 546 --

66 	GENERAtIONAl tRANSfER AND SUCCESSION
Sequoia partners to rise up to the challenge. “I’m not going to
be here forever,” he would often say. Emotion wells up, yet
again, as Pat talks about the second generational transfer. “Jim
Goetz was at the height of his game, when he decided to step
down . . . saying, my work here is done.” Today, Roelof Botha
leads the US business.
The first wave of establishing its brand and superior per-
formance, and the second of successfully expanding globally,
now enters the third inning for Sequoia. And for Sequoia to
stay ahead in the game, it has to constantly innovate and rein-
vent itself. “Our partnership will be a reflection of the future
that we all want to live in. If we lose our edge, it’s over — we
are dead. But we are working to make Sequoia a firm that is
beloved,” says Pat, as he mulls about the future. “We reflect
on how we can democratize access to capital, so that any
founder can win, not just someone with a Stanford degree and
a warm intro. We look around the table and wonder how we
can build a partnership that is representative of all groups of
founders — our customers — not just diversity of thought and
experience.
Christy Richardson, director of Private Investments, Hewl-
ett Foundation, has been a Sequoia LP for over two decades.
“The best indicator of a well-executed succession plan is when
the senior partner wants to leave, but the younger partners ask
them to stay and continue to share their knowledge and expe-
rience. We have often watched for how the leaders are building
the next-generation team, and stepping away at the right time.
Sequoia works hard to help their next-gen and newest partners
succeed,” she says.
We’ll Turn the Lights Off When We Leave
“At Foundry Group, we have no succession plan. We will
turn the lights off when we are done, and leave.”
—Brad Feld, Foundry Group

-- 96 of 546 --

tHE ARt Of lEttING GO 	67
tHE ARt Of lEttING GO
While the transition for teams at Sequoia was a planned move,
for Jerry Colonna, author of Reboot and a CEO coach, the exit from
the world of VC investments was abrupt. He was co-leading
investments for a fund with $23 billion under management.
His prior partnerships include stellar names like Fred Wilson,
of Union Square Ventures, and JP Morgan. He volunteered to
help the New York City Olympic bid in 2012. Indeed, Jerry was
at his peak. And then the Twin Tower attacks occurred. “My
home had been attacked,” Jerry said. “I came out of an Olympic
bid committee meeting and I stood across the street from the
pile, as they referred to it — Ground Zero, which was still
smoldering. It all felt like it was falling apart. It felt like there
was a complete charade.” At that moment, Jerry contemplated
suicide. He called his therapist, who urged him to “get in a cab
and come see me,” and that was a pivotal point, which led him
to spend years in reflection. He emerged from all the hurt and
ashes as a mensch and a mentor to startup founders.
“Doing yet another deal will not help me grow. VC busi-
ness is always there — it’s not going away, and I can always
come back to it,” says one investor, who walked away from
an investment role after nine years to try something different,
something new. Author and angel investor Tim Ferris stepped
away, taking a hiatus investing, because the noise simply wasn’t
worth it. The cortisol-fueled, unnecessary hurrying associated
with that culture was causing more harm than good.1
Igor Taber left Intel Capital after a decade of making invest-
ments in Silicon Valley startups. “I loved to see multiple flow-
ers bloom,” he said. Growing up in Ukraine, he was the first
in his family to go to college and get a formal education in the
United States. “I spent 10 years in Intel in a business develop-
ment role and another 10 as investor in the VC arm — no one
should stay in one company for 20 years — it feels like a life-
time,” he quips. “My transition out of venture was driven by
a great CEO and a phenomenal opportunity — it was just too

-- 97 of 546 --

68 	GENERAtIONAl tRANSfER AND SUCCESSION
good to pass.” Igor had invested in a machine learning plat-
form and served on the board for four years. “The CEO’s deter-
mination, work ethic, vision, and importantly a team builder
of giants got me excited,” and he joined Datarobot, heading up
corporate strategy and acquisitions. At Intel Capital, Taber had
funded and served on boards for more than 20 companies, but
one caught his eye.
For Paul Holland, the role was reversed. He started his
career in an operating role after a chance meeting with Reed
Hastings, founder of Netflix. “It was at a hot tub party 30 years
ago,” recalls Paul, and he ended up working with Reed, shap-
ing the trajectory at Netflix. After eight years of investing at
Foundation Capital, and as a GP for six funds, Paul plans to
transition out of the fund. “The third generation of manage-
ment is coming in at Foundation. We need to make it easy for
them. Transitions need to be structured and respectful for both
sides. At 35, you don’t know what it is like to be 58,” he says.
And on his way out, he did a parting favor to a junior part-
ner. He helped shepherd a particularly risky seed investment
that the junior partner would work on. As he heads off to his
next phase in life, Paul has made some lasting contributions,
not just to his LPs but to the industry as whole. He produced
a documentary — Something Ventured — which memorialized
the views of some of the legends of the first generation — these
include Arthur Rock, Don Valentine, and even the late Tom
Perkins, founder of Kleiner Perkins.
For some that got out, it was triggered by a life-event, for
others, boredom. And we should ask of ourselves, as Don Val-
entine did, can we leave behind a better firm — a better society
or a better tomorrow? Or did we try to enrich ourselves one
last time as we head out that door? In one of the Silicon Val-
ley firms, a retiring GP presented an elaborate NPV calculation
and a payment stream that the junior partners had to commit
to pay to the retiring GP. The departing partner planned to
collect a “royalty for using his name” for several years, and
after all that, he even retained a percentage of the GP. The new
members of the firm were bonded labor, albeit Tesla-driving
Stanford-graduates.

-- 98 of 546 --

tHE ARt Of lEttING GO 	69
Paul Holland, who has designed his own transition at
Foundation Capital, says, “As an industry, we can certainly
do better — for the most part, it has not been done right.” To
which we say, true, and read aloud, one more time Shake-
speare’s Sonnet 60:
“Like as the waves make towards the pebbl’d shore,
So do our minutes hasten to their end;
Each changing place with that which goes before,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.”

-- 99 of 546 --



-- 100 of 546 --

Part Two
71
It’s easy. It’s not easy.
The hardest and the most humbling part of a VC’s jour-
ney is often raising a venture fund. And in raising a fund, you
make an explicit promise to serve your LPs. Whether you give
them a ticket to the ringside view of the technology circus, or
empower them to play an active role in shaping the future, as
a fund manager, the first thing you do is serve your LPs. Bob
Dylan’s song “Gotta Serve Somebody” is a gentle reminder
that no matter how high you go, there is always someone
who we serve.
You may be a business man or some high-degree thief.
They may call you doctor or they may call you chief.
But you’re gonna have to serve somebody. . .
So in this section, let’s figure out the basics — who you
serve, your fund strategy, targeting the right fund investors
and LPs, the arcs of story-telling, decks and data rooms, road
shows, and more.
Raising Your
Venture Fund

-- 101 of 546 --

72 	PART TWO 	RAising YOuR VenTuRe Fund
Might I suggest that you wear that humble hat. Knee-
pads are optional but often recommended. Groveling may be
required, and is often expected in the high corridors of power.
Over some fine whiskey at the Battery Club in San Francisco,
one LP humble-bragged that he has anchored many venture
funds, being the first money in first-time funds. “I am the quin-
tessential GP king maker,” he muttered. And then he contin-
ued with a pompous smirk, “I love it when they come begging
to me. I own them.”
Just as smart founders select the right VCs on their board,
the best fund managers are able to pick the LPs that matter,
can add value, and shape their journey. Unfortunately, there
are very few of these. Pick the wrong LP and you have a toxic
problem. Some are like absent parents — who show up for an
occasional annual sporting event. The best ones build rich, col-
laborative, two-way networks.
The business of VC is like a two-sided marketplace. On one
side are the investors — your LPs and your shareholders. On
the other side are your founders. You cannot serve just one side
well — you have to ensure both sides get some love, respect,
and, above all, performance. You want LPs for life — not just
for one fund. But it’s often the first fund that counts — if you
do well, the rest becomes easier.

-- 102 of 546 --

8
73
The universe of limited partners (LPs) includes a range of
institutional investors such as foundations, university endow-
ments, pension funds, fund of funds, family offices, and sov-
ereign wealth funds. Each institution has its own DNA. Each
institutional class has its own framework and investment crite-
ria. Each institution has different sources of capital, investment
criteria, constraints, and return expectations. To achieve their
target returns, institutions have to constantly juggle with dif-
ferent types of assets.
The four major asset classes competing for investor capital
are stocks (public equities), bonds (sources of fixed income),
alternative assets (private equity, venture capital, hedge funds,
real estate), and the safest class: cash. Based on global eco-
nomic trends and risk–return potential, investors establish
strategies to deploy optimum allocation of capital in each of
these asset classes.
Asset allocation, a prudent method to manage risk and
returns, is driven by each investor’s appetite for risk, rewards,
and liquidity. Consider Exhibit 8.1.
Venture capital is a sub-asset class of private equity and
falls under the alternative investment asset class, and for most
LPs, it is a smaller fraction of the overall portfolio. Typical LPs
in any VC fund include a mix of LPs, as seen in Exhibit 8.2.
Alternative assets include a growing array of options, are
listed in Exhibit 8.3.
Certain types of alternative assets, such as private equity/
venture capital, are illiquid and contractually locked up for
LP Universe

-- 103 of 546 --

74 	LP Universe
EQUITY 	FIXED INCOME 	ALTERNATIVES
PORTFOLIO
HEDGE FUNDS
PRIVATE EQUITY
VENTURE CAPITAL
DOMESTIC
INTERNATIONAL
MEZZANINE BUYOUT
FUNDS
REAL ESTATE
ENERGY AND
NATURAL
RESOURCES
CASH
EQUIVALENTS
Exhibit 8.1 Major asset classes in an investor portfolio.
40%
5% 	10%
20%
25%
PENSION FUNDS
FINANCE AND INSURANCE
ENDOWMENTS AND
FOUNDATIONS
FAMILY OFFICES & HIGH-NET-WORTH
INDIVIDUALS (HNWIs)
CORPORATE OPERATING FUNDS
Exhibit 8.2 Typical mix of LPs in venture fund.

-- 104 of 546 --

PensiOn FUnDs 	75
10-year horizon. Such assets do not provide the same advan-
tages to investors as do equities and hedge funds. Secondary
sales of alternative are not efficient. Lack of liquidity affects
allocation outlays, and often investors seek an illiquidity pre-
mium, a higher return from such illiquid asset classes.
In this chapter we will look at each institutional investor
and understand their modus operandi. Let’s take a closer look
at the pension funds.
PensiOn FUnDs
By far, the largest source of capital for the VC universe is
pension funds. Employers create pension funds to manage
employees’ investments. Employees set aside a certain amount
of their paycheck in a separate account, with the goal of sav-
ings for retirement. Employers, with an objective of attract-
ing talented employees and incentivizing savings, match the
employee contribution into the pension plan. Thus, the two
sources of cash inflows into pension funds are a sum of con-
tributions made by individuals and employers. With a larger
pool of employees, the steady trickle of contributions grows to
a significant amount over time. The goal of any pension fund
is to provide financial security to the employees and their ben-
eficiaries.
Exhibit 8.3 Alternative Investments.
Class 	Sub-asset Class 	Investment Goals
Private equity 	Venture capital, leveraged buyout
funds (LBOs), distressed debt, mezzanine
funds, special situations
Higher returns and diversification
Hedge funds 	Global macro, absolute return, market neutral,
long/short, event driven, and derivatives
Higher returns and diversification
with better liquidity, as
compared to private equity
Real estate,
infrastructure
Real estate investment trusts (REITs), private
real estate funds
Diversification
Commodities 	Energy, oil, gas, timber, agriculture, and
managed futures
Returns/cash income streams
from other assets

-- 105 of 546 --

76 	LP Universe
The pension fund is typically a separate entity and is gov-
erned by a board of trustees. The typical asset allocation strat-
egy for this pool of capital depends on the cash needs of the
pension plan. Pension funds need to maintain a larger cash
pool to meet their monthly obligations to retirees. Consider
California Pension Retirement System (CalPERS), the larg-
est public pension fund in the United States, which has over
$300 billion in assets in management. CalPERS has allocated
about 10 percent or $28 billion to the private equity asset
class. Often, the government prescribes language requiring
that pension funds “maximize returns without undue risk of
loss.” Pension funds are also subject to political pressures,
and interference can severely affect a pension fund’s returns
and viability.
enDOWMenTs AnD FOUnDATiOns
University endowments
University endowments invest heavily in private equity and
venture capital. Like every financial institution, they have
to manage inflows, outflows, and returns on their capital. A
university’s cash inflows include student fees, grants, and
contributions. On average, student fees and grants consti-
tute 48 percent of a university’s revenues; as these sources are
uncertain, universities seek to insulate their position by cre-
ating endowments. Less than 10 percent of revenues at Yale
University have resulted from tuition, but over 40 percent of
the university’s operating income comes from its endowment.
An endowment generates investment income and provides
a cushion against any potential uncertainties. With it, a uni-
versity can focus on its primary goals of providing education
and conducting research (or building a football stadium,
depending on priorities) — activities that further social causes
and knowledge. The grants and contributions are fickle and
insufficient — neither of these is tantamount to predictable

-- 106 of 546 --

enDOWMenTs AnD FOUnDATiOns 	77
revenue streams. More than 90 percent of endowments typi-
cally spend around 5 percent of their assets each year. They
use these cash outflows for university operations or capital
expenditures. The rest is often set aside for investments. Due
to limited demands on their cash outlays, endowments are better
suited for investments in alternative strategies. At Yale University
Investments Office, as much as 33 percent of the assets are set
aside for private equity. Recall that with CalPERS, it was less
than 10 percent.
Typical asset allocation for US college and university
endowments is shown in Exhibit 8.4. Yale endowment’s pri-
vate equity asset allocation has increased steadily to over
30 percent over time.1
Kimon G. Pandapas, member of the Global Investment
Team at MIT Investment Management Company, says, “We
invest in venture capital to generate multiples of invested
capital. It’s an added bonus that in doing so, we also are sup-
porting technological innovation, as technology after all, is in
our name.”
In comparison with pension funds, endowments have
invested as much as four times the percentage of their assets
in alternative assets. In a perfect world, endowment funds can
Exhibit 8.4 Yale Endowment’s Asset Allocation.
Asset Class 	Yale University 	Educational Institution Mean
Absolute Return 	23.2 % 	20.6 %
Domestic Equity 	2.7 % 	20.8 %
Foreign Equity 	13.7 % 	21.9 %
Leveraged Buyouts 	15.9 % 	7.1 %
Natural Resources 	4.9 % 	7.7 %
Real Estate 	10.1 % 	3.4 %
Venture Capital 	21.1 % 	6.6 %
Cash & Fixed Income 	8.4 % 	11.9 %
Note the difference between Domestic Equity and Venture Capital allocations
Source: Yale Endowment, Asset Allocation as of 2019.

-- 107 of 546 --

78 	LP Universe
potentially last forever, while pension funds can run out of
money due to demands of current liabilities.
Foundations
Like endowments, foundations are a significant force in the
world of private equity. Foundations exist to support charita-
ble and nonprofit causes. Governed by federal laws and regu-
lated by the US Internal Revenue Service (IRS), foundations
are managed by their trustees. Foundations support programs
that are likely not supported by federal or state grants, such as
childcare, arts and education, health care, climate and environ-
ment, and religious and social causes. The emphasis placed on
health care by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation is one
such example. Foundations offer grants to various nonprofit
organizations to conduct these programs.
Over 75,000 foundations in the United States manage over
$500 billion in assets. Private foundations are established and
endowed by corporations (e.g., Ford Foundation, W. K. Kellogg
Foundation) or families or individuals (e.g., Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation) and fund programs that are important to
the donors. To meet IRS eligibility, private foundations must
give away as much as 5 percent of their assets each year. The
balance, 95 percent, is invested using asset allocation strate-
gies. Foundations have to report their financial information
publicly, as IRS guidelines mandate this disclosure. Besides
private foundations, other types of foundations include com-
munity foundations, which attract a large number of individual
donors from a geographic region, and corporate foundations.
Corporate foundations exist to further the cause established by
the donor corporation and are funded from the corporation’s
profits. Over 2,000 corporate foundations in the United States
hold over $10 billion in assets. Larger endowments with $1 bil-
lion or more in assets are more aggressive with private equity
investments, with as much as 57 percent of capital invested
in Alternative Strategies. The number falls to 10 percent with
smaller endowments below $25 million.

-- 108 of 546 --

sOvereiGn WeALTH FUnDs 	79
Eric Doppstadt, VP and CIO, Ford Foundation, which has
over $12 billion of assets, says, “Venture capital was once a
small cottage industry, has now become a global force, similar
to other asset classes within the alternative universe. Bear in
mind that 20 years ago, venture was a not a standalone asset
class — it was a small subset of private equity within alterna-
tives. The LPs in a VC fund would fit around a small confer-
ence table. Today, you need the largest ballroom in a hotel to
host the annual meeting of a typical VC fund.” Foundations
have aggressively stepped up their commitments to venture
capital over the past decade.
Other forms of foundations include operating founda-
tions, which conduct research or provide services, as opposed
to grant-making activities. Compared to a pension fund, the
short-term cash needs of a foundation are not as significant.
Hence, the allocations toward long-term assets, such as alter-
native assets (which includes VC), tend to be higher.
sOvereiGn WeALTH FUnDs
Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) collectively manage upward
of $15 trillion and are beginning to play a much larger role
in shaping the venture industry dynamics. Approximately 15
percent of the global alternatives market is owned by SWFs.
Exhibit 8.3 shows a few examples. State-owned investment
funds that use government surplus capital to invest in a vari-
ety of assets, SWFs can be an incomprehensible beast or a
boon. In engaging with such entities, two characteristics rise
above — due to their sheer scale and governance and political
dynamics, investment decisions take longer and are fraught
with uncertainty. And this is no place for smaller venture funds.
Sovereign wealth funds increasingly rely on private markets to
diversify away from oil and gas, into new technology frontiers
offered by the venture asset class. However, decision-making
cycles can be long, uncertain, and riddled with political and
macroeconomic dynamics.

-- 109 of 546 --

80 	LP Universe
Objectives of sovereign funds are also often tied closely to
government and socioeconomic factors. Some of these objec-
tives may not be stated publicly but become evident after a
few operating cycles. While primary goals for most funds are
financial returns, others are subtle about economic growth,
diversification, or stability of their home countries. Start by
asking about the entity’s sources of capital, mandates, govern-
ance structure, and decision-making processes. Look closely
at their operating timeline and current portfolio, as that will
tell you if the entity has already executed on building its VC
portfolio plan. With some newer sovereign entities entering
the market, unestablished funds have gotten lucky and man-
aged to get away with large commitments without meaning-
ful performance or a sustainable strategy. One GP snickered,
saying we are all guinea pigs in this grand experiment: “We
are teaching them about venture, so they should pay us the
fees, correct?”
According to a PwC report, four regions dominate the
landscape in terms of total number of entities and total assets:
Asia Pacific (specifically China), the Middle East, Europe (spe-
cifically Norway and Eastern Europe), and North America.
Asia Pacific and the Middle East account for two-thirds of
total assets.
As seen in Exhibit 8.6 (a), the average SWF size grew to $170
billion, but assets are concentrated between a small number of
Exhibit 8.5 Sovereign Wealth Funds — A Growing Opportunity
for Venture.
Country 	Entity
Assets Under
Management (AUM)
Year
Established 	Sources of Capital
China 	State Administration
of Foreign Exchange
(SAFE)
~$3 trillion 	1978 	Foreign Exchange
Reserves
Norway 	Government Pension Fund 	~$1 trillion 	1990 	Oil/Petroleum
USA 	California Public
Employee Retirement
System (CalPERS)
~ $360 billion 	1932 	State employee
pension reserves
Saudi Arabia 	Public Investment
Fund (PIF)
~$320 billion 	1971 	Government
Singapore 	Temasek Holdings 	~$308 billion 	1974 	Government

-- 110 of 546 --

sOvereiGn WeALTH FUnDs 	81
funds. Motivation for sovereign wealth funds to invest in pri-
vate markets continues to grow steadily.
See Exhibit 8.6 (b). Asset allocation to private equity has
grown from about 9 percent to 27 percent since 2002.
7.4
11.3
15.3
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
2010 	2015 	2020
Growth in Sovereign Wealth Fund Assets ($T)
Exhibit 8.6 (a) Average sovereign wealth fund size.
Source: Modified from PwC Study, Sovereign Investors 2020, A Growing Force
Asset Allocation (2002) 	Asset Allocation (2016)
Private
Equity
16.2%
Public
Equities
35.3%
Cash
48.5%
Private
Equity
28.7%
Public
Equities
38.5%
Cash
32.8%
Exhibit 8.6 (b) Asset Allocation - The shift to Private Equity.
Source: State Street Global Advisors Data, 20192

-- 111 of 546 --

82 	LP Universe
Though the allocation to private markets grows, the
emphasis on stabilization drives some funds to invest in cash
and long-term, fixed-income portfolios, while those seeking
growth are more aggressive. Take the example of two enti-
ties headquartered in Singapore: Temasek Holdings, which
has a portfolio of $300 billion, and Government of Singapore
Investment Corporation (GIC), which manages a portfolio of
$100 billion. Temasek is an investment holding company and
manages global assets and investments on a commercial basis
for the Government of Singapore. GIC manages government
reserves, including surpluses accumulated and built up since
the country’s independence. They are separate entities with
distinct roles and mandates and distinct management teams.
See Exhibit 8.7 and the impact of mandate on asset allocation
to private equity.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Economic Development 	Capital Maximization 	Stablization
Sovereign Wealth Fund Allocations vary by mandate
Alternatives
Alternatives
Public Equities
Public Equities
Public Equities
Fixed Income
Fixed Income
Cash &
Equivalents
Cash &
Equivalents
	Fixed Income
Exhibit 8.7 Asset allocation by mandate.
Source: Modified from PwC Study, Sovereign Investors 2020, A Growing Force

-- 112 of 546 --

FinAnCe AnD insUrAnCe COMPAnies 	83
FinAnCe AnD insUrAnCe COMPAnies
Within the LP universe, finance and insurance companies pro-
vide as much as 25 percent of the capital for venture capital
and private equity. Finance companies are treated as a catch-all
category to ensure clarity of presentation in this book. These
include banks, nonbank financial companies, and fund of
funds. Each finance company defines its own internal criteria
such as target returns, volatility, holding period/time horizon,
which helps develop their asset allocation plan.
Like pension funds, insurance companies manage a large
amount of cash inflows and outflows. Any insurance company
is in the business of managing risk. An insured party pays a
premium at a fixed time interval — say, monthly, quarterly, or
annually. Insurance companies invest the premiums, but the
underlying driver is to meet a potential obligation that may
occur in the future. If an accident occurs, the insured receives
compensation. The business model of any insurance company
can be reduced to inflows via premium payments and invest-
ment income. Underwriting expenses and incurred losses are
primary outflows. The scope of the insurer’s business and
required guarantees drives the target rate of return. These fac-
tors determine an asset allocation strategy for any insurance
company. As the demand for liquidity is high, the insurance
companies do not wish to lock up their capital in VC funds for
10 years. The appetite for VC/PE is often low.
Insurance companies have a unique advantage as a busi-
ness model: The customer pays up front and eventually, at
some point in the future, may receive benefits. In some cases,
all a customer may ever get is the proverbial peace of mind.
The primary mechanism to generate investment income for
insurance companies is management of “float” — the amount
of money that “floats” with the insurance company as premi-
ums arrive and sits around, waiting to be paid out in the event
of any claims. Insurance companies need to maintain certain
levels of capital; if they fail, regulators can swoop in. Sol-
vency requirements are an important factor; hence the need to

-- 113 of 546 --

84 	LP Universe
maintain a certain level of cash is important. Thus, insurance
companies have to model their cash needs based on an actuar-
ial assessment of risk and liabilities. In any insurance company,
the accounting and actuarial teams develop the overall plan
that determines cash inflows and outflows. Inflows are pre-
dictable, but outflows are not entirely predictable. Actuaries
invest an enormous amount of time in modeling demographic
patterns of fire, floods, accidents, and other acts of God to
derive a co-relationship between premiums and claims — or
risks and rewards. Hence, insurance companies attempt to
manage their cash positions and liquidity effectively, as unan-
ticipated events could occur and affect their solvency. Thus,
asset allocation for insurance companies is heavily weighted
in low-risk investments such as bonds. Venture capital invest-
ments are lower on the totem pole and fall in the “Other” cat-
egory for most insurance companies.
FAMiLY OFFiCes AnD HiGH-neT-WOrTH inDiviDUALs
According to World Wealth Report, worldwide, wealthy
families and individuals control about $42 trillion. More than
100,000 individuals in the United States are estimated to have
assets in excess of $10 million. Family offices and HNWIs con-
tribute as much as 10 percent of all capital in venture funds.
A family office is a private company, established to manage
That’s One Happy Family. . .
The Hillman family office of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
helped launch Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers (KPCB) Fund
I, with a $4 million investment in an $8 million fund. KPCB
Fund I invested in 17 companies such as Applied Materials,
Genentech, Tandem Computers (and one called “Snow-Job”),
and returned $345 million to its investors. The estimated 43X
cash-on-cash return made the Hillmans very happy, thank
you very much.

-- 114 of 546 --

FAMiLY OFFiCes AnD HiGH-neT-WOrTH inDiviDUALs 	85
investments of any single wealthy family. A single-family office
(SFO) or a multifamily office (MFO), as their names suggest,
are professionally managed investment companies that serve
the needs of wealthy families. One of the primary functions
of a traditional family office is to consolidate financial man-
agement with a view to preserving wealth, generating returns,
and minimizing the tax impact for any family’s fortune. Small
teams of confidants, including professional investment man-
agers, are responsible for managing the family’s assets and the
family office.
Among the other major tasks handled by the family office
are the management of taxes, property management, account-
ing, payroll processing, and other concierge-type services
such as travel arrangements. Family offices are classified as
Class A, B, or C, depending on their administrative struc-
ture. Class A family offices are operated by an independent
company with direct supervision from a family trustee or an
appointed administrator. Class B family offices are operated
by an accounting firm, bank, or a law firm, and Class C family
offices are directly operated by the family with a small support
staff. MFOs consolidate activities for several wealthy families
with the objective of minimizing operational costs.
The Family Wealth Alliance estimates there are approxi-
mately 3,000 US-based single-family offices and 150 multi-
family offices. SFOs manage assets ranging from $42 million
to $1.5 billion. Total assets under advisement by MFOs are
upward of $350 billion, with an average client relationship
size of $50 million. Median asset size at any MFO is close to
$1 billion.
According to a study conducted at the Wharton School,
the most important objective for the SFO is transgenerational
wealth management. Having an SFO also allows the family
members to pursue their own careers, while enjoying the ben-
efits of professionally managed, effective money management
strategies. As the wealth comes from family business, 58 percent
choose to remain involved in operating the businesses, and 77
percent are majority stakeholders in their holding companies.
This has implications from an investment decision-making

-- 115 of 546 --

86 	LP Universe
perspective. Cap Gemini World Wealth Report reports typi-
cal asset allocation for family offices is 8 percent in alterna-
tives. However, some family offices have a strong propensity
to invest heavily in venture capital asset class.
In Europe, 63 percent of SFOs manage asset allocation
in-house versus 47 percent of SFOs in the Americas. Thus,
investment decisions and process timelines may differ if pro-
fessionals manage the office. Due to the size of assets and the
conservative undertones, the decision-making cycle for invest-
ment in PE and VC is comparatively longer. Family offices are
a significant source of capital for venture funds.
In terms of the total global high-net-worth family popula-
tion, it remains highly concentrated, with the United States,
Japan, and Germany accounting for 60.3 percent of the world’s
population. The fastest growth of high-net-worths is in Asia or
“Ch-India.”
COrPOrATe OPerATinG FUnDs
Corporate investments in venture funds make up a bare whis-
per of 2 percent of all capital flowing into venture funds. A
number of corporations, such as SAP, Cisco, Dow Chemical
Company, and IBM, invest as LPs in externally managed ven-
ture funds. Others establish internally managed “corporate VC
(CVC) funds” such as Google Ventures, which invest directly
in companies. CVCs invest about 6 percent of annual VC
investments in companies.
COMPArisOn OF LiMiTeD PArTnersHiPs
In comparing the various LPs in Exhibit 8.8, the allocation to
alternatives varies, as does their primary motivation for invest-
ing in the VC asset class. Any venture practitioner seeking to
raise capital needs to consider the size of an investor’s alter-
native asset pool, decision-making criteria, and timelines of
each investor. Family offices and foundations make decisions

-- 116 of 546 --

COMPArisOn OF LiMiTeD PArTnersHiPs 	87
at a faster pace while pension funds and SWFs have longer
approval cycles.
For any venture practitioner, it is imperative to understand
the universe of alternative asset investors because each one has
its own set of constraints. Endowments and foundations are
highly aligned toward the venture asset class, while insurance
companies are the most risk-averse.
While considering an investment in any venture capital
fund, each LP assesses the opportunity based on the follow-
ing criteria:
• 	Asset allocation strategy. A set of investment principles and
portfolio construction guidelines designed to generate
Exhibit 8.8 Comparing the LP Universe.
Investor Type
Typical
Percentage
of Assets in
Alternatives 	Decision Maker(s) 	Drivers 	Constraints
Endowments and
foundations
51% 	CIO 	Financial returns 	Size of investment
staff; social and
political views
Pension funds 	14% 	Portfolio manager, chief
investment officer
(CIO), investment
committee; state
treasurer may be
the final signatory
Financial returns 	Liquidity and risk
management, size
of investment staff,
regulatory, political
perspectives
Sovereign
Wealth
Funds
N/A 	Concentrated within
small trusted
circles
Diversification of
assets, access
to technology
and innovation
Lengthy processes,
opaque and driven
by political and
cultural constraints
Family offices 	8% 	Managing director;
family member
may be the final
signatory
Financial returns,
a seat at the
innovation table
Limited bandwidth;
strategy and
allocations are
highly fluid
Insurance
companies
6% 	CIO 	Capital conservation 	Liability, liquidity,
solvency,
regulatory
Corporations’
operating
funds
Opportunistic Corporate development,
CFO, or CEO
Insights into
developing
technologies
and new
revenue streams
Limited percentage
allocation, board
approvals; long-
term participation
is unlikely

-- 117 of 546 --

88 	LP Universe
an overall target rate of return for the LPs. Venture capital
is treated as a sub-asset class of private equity that falls
under alternative assets.
• 	Investment strategy and criteria. The factors that help LPs
choose target investments within each of the asset classes.
• 	Investment process. Timelines and steps each LP needs
to follow to make an investment decision within each
asset class.
Capital flows into venture funds from limited partners
(LPs), which include pension funds, university endowments,
foundations, finance companies, sovereign funds, and high-
net-worth individuals. Once we understand LP profiles and
their constraints, we can identify which LP may be best suited
for a venture fund.
While pension funds are the largest contributor, these are
also conservative with respect to VC allocations. Endowments
and foundations are comparatively more aggressive and allo-
cate larger portions to VC asset classes. Finance companies act
as specialized intermediaries and follow the guidelines estab-
lished by their sponsors. A fund of funds (FoF) is one such
example — it is established as an intermediary to allow larger
institutional investors to research, gain access to, and manage
VC fund investments.
The universe of LPs is vast, with each LP seeking differ-
ent risk-to-return goals. A seed-stage fund may be better suited
in targeting family offices, whereas a national/global fund
with an established track record can attract pension funds
and endowments. As in any sales process, understanding LPs
will help you to manage your “somewhat hellish” fundrais-
ing process. A fund of funds is a separate “mini-LP-universe”
discussed in the following chapter.

-- 118 of 546 --

9
89
Some large, really large institutional investors (like pension
funds and endowments) invest in venture capital funds using
an indirect investment approach. They pick an intermediary —
a fund of funds (FoF) — as opposed to investing in venture
funds directly. Now the obvious question is, why do smart,
institutional investors bother adding a middleman — yet
another layer in this mix? After all, they could bypass this step
and invest in funds directly.
ADVANTAGES OF A FUND OF FUNDS
The fund of funds (FoF) model was established to meet the
asset allocation and diversification demands of larger finan-
cial institutions. OK, let’s try that in plain English — large,
multibillion-dollar institutional investors have to sprinkle
money in different buckets. Each bucket is an asset class
and has risk associated with it and offers a different finan-
cial return. As we saw earlier, there are many buckets such as
stocks, bonds, and real estate — even bitcoins. Venture is one
such bucket. It’s a smallish bucket when you compare it with
other buckets like hedge funds, but it’s getting bigger.
The venture bucket competes with a lot of other buckets for
attention. As a result of risk-reward trade offs, not all buckets
are equal. VC is the riskiest of them all — indeed, we often
LPs of Choice: Fund
of Funds

-- 119 of 546 --

90 	LPs OF CHOICE: FUND OF FUNDS
brag that 9 out of 10 companies in any fund’s portfolio will
fail. That’s 90 percent of your LP capital squandered away. Not
too long ago, eager investors put $1.5 million in a social media
startup that built an app that would allow us to say “Yo” to
each other. That’s all. Nothing more.
VC is risky but also suffers from lack of consistency of
returns. You see wild swings in the returns, and for those who
expect predictable behavior, this can be a problem. The standard
deviation (a fancy term for a inconsistency of returns, or a meas-
ure of risk) varies as much as 150 percent in VC asset classes,
and that’s a big headache for investors. On top of that, every
VC fund claims to be a top performer. As noted in Chapter 6,
a fund of funds bemoaned in one of its newsletters that VCs
sound like that mythical town called Lake Wobegon, where all
the women are strong, all the men are good looking, and all
the children are above average. Another fund of funds man-
ager said, “When every VC fund tells us they are top quartile, I
wonder where the rest of three quartiles managers are — I just
cannot seem to find them.”
So when you have (a) high risk and inconsistent returns
coupled with (b) less than 10 percent of your assets allocated
to VC and (c) everyone is a rock star VC, you end up with a
challenging situation. To avoid this theater and madness, insti-
tutional investors have “outsourced” the selection process of
Fund of Funds: Bridging Institutions and Venture Firms
Funds of funds raise approximately $30 billion in any given
year. The first fund of funds was raised in the 1980s, when
a firm that would eventually become Adams Street Partners
raised $60 million. Today, Adams Street Partners raises $2
billion each year and manages over $25+ billion. It typically
invests in 15 to 30 new partnership commitments. Its tar-
get allocation typically includes 30 percent in venture capital,
with the largest slice allocated to buyout funds 40 percent and
the rest set aside for mezzanine and distressed debt funds.

-- 120 of 546 --

ADVANTAGES OF A FUND OF FUNDS 	91
VC funds to fund of funds. To institutional investors, a fund of
funds offers the following advantages:
Efficiency. For a $50 billion pension fund with less than 10 per-
cent of its assets in private equity, the world is further
sliced into mezzanine, buyouts, and venture. Apply
another set of layers of risk diversification — sectors,
geography, size, and vintage year — and what you have
is a fairly complex matrix of relatively small investments.
The ability to manage such investments effectively
becomes a challenge for the pension fund managers. In
such situations, fund of funds allow these larger institu-
tions to efficiently participate in the venture capital asset
class without substantially increasing their workload
and overhead.
Access. Fund of funds offer access to elite funds and have
deeper knowledge of emerging funds with higher
potential for performance. They are actively engaged,
often keeping a close eye on the market dynam-
ics, tracking emerging managers and high perform-
ers. Institutional investors often lack the abilities or
resources to conduct research and proactively build
relationships. Fund of funds offer specialized expertise
to track and monitor industry trends, identify winners,
build relationships with key managers, and stay current
with investment themes and market terms.
Diversification. The universe of the venture capital fund
managers evolves with the ebb and flow of economic
trends and opportunities: sector-focused funds, geo-
graphic funds, and stage centric funds. As investors
diversify and spread out risk over a range of different
assets, a fund of funds can reduce their burden by man-
aging a portfolio of venture funds.
Cost structure. Fund of funds are cost-effective solutions for
institutional investors because the due diligence, nego-
tiations, and post-investment portfolio management

-- 121 of 546 --

92 	LPs OF CHOICE: FUND OF FUNDS
is outsourced to the managers. A typical fee structure
is 5 percent carried interest, combined with approxi-
mately 0.75 percent annual management fee, as seen in
Exhibit 9.1.
FUND OF FUNDS INVESTMENT STRATEGIES
Let us look at three funds of funds in Exhibit 9.2, each focused
on venture capital funds, yet their investment strategy differs
based on focus, geography, capital under management, and
value provided to their fund portfolio.
Top 	Tier 	Capital 	Partners 	is 	a 	San 	Francisco–based
niche-focused fund of funds. The firm makes primary and
secondary investments in venture capital funds. Its experience,
relationships, 	and 	reputation 	within 	the 	venture 	capital
community have enabled a portfolio that includes the who’s
who of venture fund managers, such as Andreessen Horowitz,
Accel Partners, Battery Ventures, Kleiner Perkins Caufield &
Byers (KPCB), and True Ventures, among others.
• Pension funds
• Foundations
• Endowments
• Sovereign
wealth funds
Institutional
Investors
• Stepstone
Group
• Top Tier Capital
Partners
• Cendana
Capital
• Renaissance VC
Fund
• Accel
• Sequoia
• Benchmark
• Base 10
Partners
• Foundry Group
Venture
Capital
Fund of
Funds
Fees = 2.0%
Carried Interest = 20%
Fees = 0.75%
Carried Interest = 5%
Exhibit 9.1 Fund of funds business model.

-- 122 of 546 --

FUND OF FUNDS INVESTMENT STRATEGIES 	93
Cendana Capital invests in institutional seed funds or
micro-venture capital funds. Micro-venture capital funds (typ-
ically fund size of less than $100 million) target companies at a
seed stage. Michael Kim, who launched Cendana Capital, the
first fund of funds to target the micro-venture space, was the
former chair of the Investment Committee of the San Francisco
Employees Retirement System (SFERS), a $17 billion public
pension fund. At Cendana Capital, Michael meets around 250
fund managers each year but invests in only 10 funds. “Most
of the funds we have invested in are managed by former entre-
preneurs. Having spent the past decade as both an LP and GP,
it is clear that there are significant incongruities in how LPs
and GPs seek to generate returns,” says Michael.
Renaissance Venture Capital Fund (RVCF) is a fund of funds
that invests in venture capital funds with a geographic focus
on Michigan. Besides generating returns, the fund of funds aims
to foster innovation by connecting its investors — primarily
Fortune 500 corporations — with startup companies. “As fund-
of-funds model evolves, two factors come into play — access
to superior VCs and the ability to add value to three
constituents — our LPs, our venture funds and the portfolio
companies,” says Christopher Rizik, CEO of the fund of funds,
Exhibit 9.2 Fund of Funds Strategies: A Comparison.
Top Tier Capital Partners 	Cendana Capital 	Renaissance VC Fund
Assets under
management
$3.3 billion 	~$250 million 	$200 million
Average investment
size in a venture
fund
$25 million 	$5 million to
$10 million
$5 million to $10 million
Manager focus 	Established funds 	Micro VC funds 	Blend of early regional
and established
national funds
Geographic focus 	US only, with higher concen
tration in California
and New York
Silicon Valley and
New York City only
Bicoastal funds investing
in Michigan and
the Midwest.
Sectors of interest 	Primarily technology, with
select life sciences
Technology only 	Technology and life
sciences
Current portfolio 	~ 60 venture firms 	~ 25 venture firms 	~ 25 venture firms

-- 123 of 546 --

94 	LPs OF CHOICE: FUND OF FUNDS
who has been a former GP with a $100 million venture fund.
The driver to launch such a fund came about with a simple
realization that the two sides need each other:
Corporations need a line of sight in new technology devel-
opments, and startups need access to Fortune 500 customers.
A single such customer can often change the course of any
startup’s trajectory and turn failure into success. What’s
attractive is that unlike government-sponsored funds, there
are no restrictions on the amount of investment to be made
locally. On the other hand, the Renaissance model follows the
premise that there are enough opportunities, ideas, assets,
and talent in their states, and there’s no need to burden
venture capital firms with rules and regulations. . . .We tore
up the old arcane, protective rules of many similar funds
and focused instead on aggressively bringing together the
assets that made our region so special.
In comparing all LP types, the fund-of-funds model stands
apart from classical institutional LPs such as endowments/
pension funds because they bring a much higher level of
insights, context, and intellectual rigor to the business.
They can (a) guide VCs on various best practices/processes,
(b) connect VCs with relevant counterparts, and (c) be driven
to succeed as much as VCs are. After all, if they don’t gener-
ate returns, they go out of business. I have found that some
fund of funds managers are excellent thought leaders — they
keep a close watch on the technology frontiers; review a lot
of funds, strategies, and inflated internal rate of return (IRR)
data; and gently but firmly challenge every assumption. They
hold VCs to a higher standard. These are the “super LPs of
choice” — you want them on your side!

-- 124 of 546 --

10
95
Investors and limited partners begin and end fund diligence
by assessing the strength of the investment team — the gen-
eral partners (GPs) and their investment strategy. If the invest-
ment team has a demonstrated performance track record and
relevant expertise and is pursuing a compelling strategy, fun-
draising can be a lark. Limited partners (LPs) proactively seek
prudent and experienced fund managers who can be good
stewards of their capital and generate strong returns. Some
seek established managers, while other focus on emerging
managers — a new crop that may bring a fresher approach,
energy, and malleability to the business.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY INVESTMENT CRITERIA
Institutional investors evaluate venture firms on two primary
criteria: the fund managers’ expertise and their investment
strategy. Secondary criteria include investment terms and mar-
ket conditions, as presented in Exhibit 10.1. Primary criteria
can be evaluated as follows:
• 	Fund managers’ expertise. As the primary criteria, limited
partners seek to understand entrepreneurial/domain
expertise. Investment track record and performance
is one of the foremost criteria. And track record comes
How LPs Conduct Fund
Due Diligence

-- 125 of 546 --

96 	HOW LPs CONDUCT FUND DUE DILIGENCE
from experience, which comes from losses. The first few
investments for any professional are often considered
as an expensive learning exercise. As LPs often groan,
“It takes $10 million to make a good VC, and that $10
million better come from the LP next door — not from
me, thank you.”
• 	Investment strategy. What is a fund’s investment strat-
egy, and how does it stand apart from the rest of venture
funds? What unique factors/differentiators or “unfair
advantage” does this combination of investors and their
strategy bring to the venture capital arena?
In a study titled “What Drives Venture Capital Fund Rais-
ing?,” authors Paul A. Gompers and Josh Lerner concluded
that fund performance and reputation were the key determi-
nants of fundraising, in addition to macroeconomic and regu-
latory factors.1 In another survey of over 200 US-based LPs,
they described fund performance as a starting point of their
diligence.2 LPs aspire to get an internal rate of return with a
GP skills and expertise 	Clearly differentiated
Macro drivers of fund opportunity
aligned with strategy
Fund’s brand recognition and
ability to attract investments
Competition from other funds
Portfolio construction plan &
reserves aligned with target returns
TEAM 	STRATEGY
INVESTMENT
TERMS & FIT
MARKET
DYNAMICS
“Unfair advantage” in sourcing
opportunities
Team stability, cohesion
Alignment of economic interests
Alignment of interests: fees and
carry, key person, clawbacks,
and waterfall
Fit within current LP portfolio
Timing of fund closing
Track record at fund level and
partner level
Exhibit 10.1 Limited partner investment criteria.

-- 126 of 546 --

FUND SELECTION CRITERIA 	97
minimum floor of 12 percent, and ideally closer to 20–30 per-
cent, to be considered for investment. The returns are typically
tied to a benchmark index for comparing performance. A per-
formance of 400 basis points above the benchmark index (such
as Russell 3000, or S&P 500) is often a threshold established by
institutional investors.
FUND SELECTION CRITERIA
In their book Beyond the J Curve, authors Thomas Meyer and
Pierre-Yves Mathonet propose qualitative scoring criteria,
which ranks the fund management team and fund strategy as
the top weighted factors, as shown in Exhibit 10.2.
Lisa Edgar of Top Tier Capital Partners, a fund of funds,
starts her screening process with performance. “In an envi-
ronment defined by change, it is important to assess the fund
manager’s ability to produce superior returns across various
technological and economic cycles,” she says. 3 Top Tier Capital
Partners has established relationships with some of the leading
Exhibit 10.2 Fund Selection Criteria.
No. 	Dimension 	Weight (%) 	Remarks
1 	Management
team skills
30 	Investment and operational experience, sector expertise, regional
connections, size of team, and complementary skills
2 	Management
team stability
10 	Clear roles, responsibilities, decision-making, historical
relationships and stability, economic alignment of incentives,
financial stability of fund, and succession planning
3 	Management team
motivation
10 	GP commitment percentage, incentive structure, reputation, team
independence, outside activities, and conflicts of interest
4 	Fund strategy 	15 	Sourcing, stage/sector, fund size, exit strategy, and overall
strategy fit
5 	Fund structure 	10 	Costs/fees, governance, and compliance
6 	External validation 	10 	Track record of previous funds, performance of comparable funds,
quality of co-investors, and recurrence of investors
7 	Overall fit 	15 	Considers the overall picture — for example, the fit between the
team, fund size, and the strategy
Source: Adapted from Thomas Meyer and Pierre-Yves Mathonet, Beyond the J Curve — Managing a Portfolio of Venture Capital and
Private Equity Funds (Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 2005), 221. © 2005 John Wiley & Sons

-- 127 of 546 --

98 	HOW LPs CONDUCT FUND DUE DILIGENCE
venture funds in Silicon Valley. For some LPs, investing in a
first-time fund is a risky proposition. Fisher Lynch Capital,
a fund of funds, seeks proven GPs. “A roman numeral V or
higher is a good start,” says Georganne Perkins, a senior advi-
sor with the firm.4 Such a fund would have established a track
record over the past four funds and demonstrated its ability to
withstand changes in its team, strategy, and technology cycles.
But some LPs actively seek first-time fund managers who may
be hungrier, driven, and bring a unique point of view to the
investment climate. “Like any entrepreneur looking for the
next best opportunity, we are always seeking the most promis-
ing managers of the future,”5 advises Kenneth Van Heel, who
manages $10 billion in assets as the head of the corporate pen-
sion fund for Dow Chemical Company.
Beyond 	performance, 	the 	top 	due-diligence 	criteria
included team stability and a consistent investment strategy.6
“My primary goal is to understand the partnership dynamics,”
says Lindel Eakman, who manages Foundry Group’s fund of
funds business. As an LP for over a decade, Lindel has seen
partnerships fall apart due to interpersonal dynamics and bad
chemistry. Acrimonious lawsuits between investment partners
create unnecessary headaches for all LPs. Hence, one of the
first criteria LPs try to ascertain is stability of the management
team. As there is no simple way to predict if marriages and
partnerships can survive for long, institutional LPs often avoid
the ones who have just begun dating.

-- 128 of 546 --

11
99
An investment strategy — the raison d’être of any venture
firm — combines fund managers’ skills and expertise with
a given market opportunity. Most venture capitalists use
emergent strategies, in which the firm adopts a sandbox but
remains flexible enough to deal with exceptions. Boundaries
are adjusted periodically, and when exceptions occur, they are
driven by the potential for return.
A well-established strategy blends macro-trends data with the
fund managers’ expertise, relationships, insights, and analysis.
Synthesizing this information, a fund manager points to the future,
where opportunities may grow and generate significant returns.
MARKET OPPORTUNITY
Certain sectors show promise as underlying technologies
evolve, while others run out of favor. As the bulky mainframe
computer transitioned to the ubiquitous desktop, the ecosys-
tem of hardware and software opportunities emerged. In the
late 1970s and early 1980s, the first computing wave attracted
eager investors, who backed over a hundred hardware start-
ups that focused on disk drives, desktop computers, and allied
products. Apple, Intel, Tandem Computers, LSI Logic, and
others were amongst the first venture-backed winners. As the
networking wave emerged, investors found companies like
Cisco, Juniper Networks, Bay Networks, 3Com, and others.
Defining Your Fund’s
Investment Strategy

-- 129 of 546 --

100 	DEfININg YOUR fUND’s INvEsTMENT sTRATEgY
Soon thereafter, the internet boom (and bust) occurred fol-
lowed by the disruptive forces of cloud computing, and mobile
innovations, and now, artificial intelligence has found its way
in every investment theme.
Let us consider the inherent drivers of market opportunity.
Do structural shifts in the market create new investment
opportunities? Management guru Peter Drucker would have said
yes. Drucker defined systematic innovation as the “purposeful
and organized search for changes, and . . . systematic analysis
of the opportunities such changes might offer.”1 He outlined
seven sources of innovative opportunity and said that the lines
between these sources are blurred and overlap considerably
(see Exhibit 11.1).
Exhibit 11.1 Drucker’s Seven Sources for Innovative Opportunity.
Sources 	Definition 	Examples
Unexpected 	Unexpected events, successes, or
failures lead to opportunity.
Financial crisis and the rise of
bitcoins, AirBnb, and the sharing
economy, Pandemic
Incongruities 	Discrepancy or dissonance between
“what is” and “what ought to be”; composed
of four areas: (1) economic realities of an
industry and marketplace,
(2) other realities of an industry (optimization
of local, nonessential areas), (3) customer
expectations versus the industry perception
of customer expectations, (4) internal process
incongruity
Costs, processes, and quality of
health care in the United States
Investing in China despite political
and regulatory challenges
Process needs 	Missing links or unmet needs in a
process that could make the process
cheaper, easier, or technologically or
economically possible
Artificial intelligence, Payment
processing/credit cards
Industry and market
structures
Changes in industry or market such as
new competitors, new customers, more
differentiated products, new manufacturing
or marketing processes, new substitute, or
complementary products or services
Multi-cloud adoption, New
applications in cybersecurity
Changes in
demographics
Changes in population structure, age
structure, cultural composition,
employment, education, and income
Aging population and health
care needs
Changes in
perception
Perceptional shift: “the glass is half full”
versus “the glass is half empty”
Crypto-currencies, Cleantech
New knowledge 	Discovery of new knowledge such
as a new technology or materials
Quantum computing, 3D printing
Source: Adapted from Peter F. Drucker, Innovation and Entrepreneurship (Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1985).

-- 130 of 546 --

MARKET OPPORTUNITY 	101
Opportunity is embedded in four sources (the unexpected,
incongruity, process needs, and structural changes), and three
external factors (demographics, changes in perception, and
new knowledge) are drivers of opportunity.2
It is not so much as identifying the market opportunity
but, rather, tying the opportunity in a cohesive manner with
the fund manager’s expertise and their ability to execute the
investment strategy. As Bob Dylan once sang, “You don’t need
a weatherman to know which way the wind blows.”
Other factors that impact investment strategy include geog-
raphy (underserved regions yield opportunities due to pricing
advantages) and the stage of investments (earlier-stage compa-
nies need less capital but are riskier investments). Ultimately,
an investment strategy is a combination of the fund manager’s
expertise, the market opportunity within the sector, geographic
advantages, stage of investments, and the size of the fund. No
single element stands out as much as the GP expertise. A few
examples of fund strategies are laid out in Exhibit 11.2.
Once a strategy is established, leading practitioners not only
seek existing opportunities but also lead the formation of compa-
nies based on the white spaces, road maps, or the open avenues
in the market. Adrian Fortino, Partner at Mercury Fund, says,
“In my first year at Mercury Fund, the most exciting part of the
job was to build my own investment theme. It was a clean sheet
Exhibit 11.2 Variations on a Theme: How Strategy Differs
in Venture Firms.
Fund 	Sector 	Stage 	Competitive Advantages
Arboretum Ventures 	Health care 	Early 	One of the largest venture fund in the
Midwest, with established track record of
investments, exits, and IPOs
Base 10 Partners 	Automation and
AI technology
Early 	Hyperconnected GPs, with Silicon Valley access
to founders and top-tier investors
Switch Ventures 	Consumer technology 	Seed 	Ex-McKinsey GP, with operating expertise and
data-driven sourcing approach
Brick and Mortar
Ventures
Construction and real
estate technology
Early 	First-mover investor in a rapidly growing sector.
GP has ties with Bechtel family, with access
to construction sector customer network,
market challenges, and usage patterns

-- 131 of 546 --

102 	DEfININg YOUR fUND’s INvEsTMENT sTRATEgY
Exhibit 11.3 Midcontinent US attracts 12% of total VC spend. Mercury
Fund’s strategy focuses on this underserved market.
approach, and I could build on my experience of seven years in the
manufacturing world. As we studied the impact software could
have on this arena, it led me to develop our Intelligent Manufac-
turing investment theme.” Using this framework, Adrian went
on to search and invest in a number of companies that brought
efficiencies to the world of industrial processes. Mercury Fund
also positions itself as serving the vast Middle America, where
paucity of capital can allow for realistic valuations.
When investor Arthur Rock raised his first fund in the early
1960s, he would recall, “The scientists who had moved from
the east to the west had all the ideas. So I saw a great opportu-
nity in bringing the East Coast money out. . .backing these peo-
ple on the West Coast. ‘Go West, young man.’” In 1961, Arthur
Rock raised $5 million from East Coast investors and moved to
San Francisco to start his own venture capital firm. The fund
returned a tidy sum of $90 million back to its investors.
“Even with a great roadmap, it’s always necessary to main-
tain an open mind to great opportunistic investments,” writes
David Cowan, who rues Bessemer’s inability to exit telecom
investments at the right time.4
COMPETITIvE ADvANTAgEs
“VCs don’t understand their competition as well, nor do they
run their business like a typical startup. You should know

-- 132 of 546 --

COMPETITIvE ADvANTAgEs 	103
The Top-Down Approach to Building Your Thesis:
Roadmap Investing
“Each Bessemer investment road map begins with an
analysis of disruptive catalysts that have the potential to
cause major displacements in our economy. Those disrup-
tive catalysts might be technical (e.g., network vulnerabili-
ties), demographic (e.g., aging US population), regulatory
(e.g., spectrum auctions or Sarbanes Oxley), psychographic
(e.g., consumer concerns about security), or geopolitical (e.g.,
China’s reception to foreign investment). We at Bessemer try
to take the road map investing approach more seriously than
most,” writes David Cowan of Bessemer Venture Partners.
“Fresh out of business school, I joined Bessemer and pro-
ceeded to fall in love with every crappy pitch I heard. For-
tunately, before I did any damage, my bosses intervened.
I developed a comprehensive list of 38 potential invest-
ment sectors of high technology, and I spent the next three
months whittling it down. I crossed off sectors that required
deep domain knowledge — sectors that were too early, too
crowded, or too unproven. . . . I solicited advice from the
smartest experts I could find. I went to conferences, survey-
ing buyers,” writes Cowan.
This resulted in sharpening the saw, which allowed him
to focus, narrowing down his investment horizon to the
data and communications subsectors. Cowan’s road map
lays out specific strategies, or “initiatives,” to exploit the
disruption. “For each of these initiatives [Bessemer] made
one investment in the best team we could find attacking the
problem — some were follow-on rounds . . . and some were
new teams that we incubated in our offices.” Creating a road
map allows a practitioner to spot the growth opportuni-
ties and the opportunities in ever-evolving the technology
landscape. 3

-- 133 of 546 --

104 	DEfININg YOUR fUND’s INvEsTMENT sTRATEgY
Investment Thesis: Union Square Ventures Describes
the Power of Network Effects
Venture firms operate a bunch of different ways. Some have
a geographical focus, others have a sector focus, still others
have a stage focus. Union Square Ventures’ (USV) focus was
summarized in a simple statement:
Large networks of engaged users, differentiated through
user experience, and defensible through network effects.
The partners write, “When we are organizing our activi-
ties and thinking about investment decisions, then we parse
that a little finer, we unpack some of the components. ‘Large’
obviously requires scale — Twitter is a great example. But
it can also mean large relative to a specific problem set or
community. Stack Exchange is comprised of over 80 ques-
tion and answer sites. Some of those sites, like Server Fault,
are designed for very specific communities, but aim to have
most of the potential members of that community as active
participants. Similarly, Behance is designed for the world’s
creative professionals.”
“Networks” are, of course, interconnected groups or
systems, but they also come in a few flavors. For example,
networks can be centered around person-to-person shar-
ing of an activity (foursquare, Soundcloud), facilitating a
transaction (Dwolla), enabling creativity (Tumblr, Wattpad),
person-to-person marketplaces (Etsy, Kickstarter), or busi-
ness and personal finance marketplaces (Lending Club,
Funding Circle). Marketplaces have some of the more inter-
esting network components and use the efficient exchange
of information to produce superior economics and create
new economies in their area of focus. Examples include the
creative projects that wouldn’t otherwise come to fruition if
the Kickstarter marketplace was not active, the individuals
finding work through Workmarket’s labor resource mar-
ket, or the active secondary market in small business loans
(and pieces thereof) being traded through Funding Circle.
Finally, networks can also be networks of data, such as what

-- 134 of 546 --

COMPETITIvE ADvANTAgEs 	105
DuckDuckGo (search), Indeed (jobs), and Flurry (mobile
apps) are doing that then provide aggregate data-level ben-
efits to users from that data network aggregation.
We will also look closely at the “user experience” of these
networks, being most interested in novel (“differentiated”)
web and mobile native interface ways to engage users around
a solution to the particular problem, one that is consistent
with the fabric of the users’ experiences. With Etsy, USV
believes that “the best long-term steward of a network will
be a company that focuses on value creation for all partici-
pants in the network instead of solely for its shareholders.”
Businesses that create barriers to entry through “network
effects” — the value of a service to a user increases as others
use it. This can potentially arise in a number of ways: for
example a proprietary data asset; the marketplace dynam-
ics of having a robust set of sellers and buyers; or through
the development of a community that openly shares and
exchanges information. In an era where the initial cost to
develop the prototype of a product has been dramatically
reduced, where there are mature and scalable open-source
tools and services to utilize for that development, and where
cloud infrastructure is available on demand and at a variable
cost, defensibility may no longer be found in the technology
underpinnings — the code or IP — of a service. Defensibility
may, however, arise through the growth of service that gets
more valuable, and more interesting, with each new partici-
pant. One nice example of this is Twitter, which is so poten-
tially valuable because, put simply, that’s where the Tweets
as well as the personal follower/following relationships
reside. The value of these businesses tends to be composed
of the very networks they have created.
Taken together, these components comprise how USV
looks at the Internet at large to find places where we should
invest and where we can be good partners. Of course, the
components are not monolithic and are subject to nuance
and interpretation, but again, of course, that’s what makes
them most interesting.

-- 135 of 546 --

106 	DEfININg YOUR fUND’s INvEsTMENT sTRATEgY
where you fit into the market,” says Lindel Eakman, who
heads the fund-of-funds practice at Foundry Group. “It’s
easier to start companies, and that has led to an explosion of
technology opportunities. As a result, we have seen a large
number of technology-focused early-stage funds with no
clear differentiation. After a while, they all sound the same,”
says Chris Rizik, former VC and CEO of Renaissance Venture
Capital Fund, a fund of funds. In building competitive
advantage, VCs need to research the funds actively investing
in their target markets. While this is obvious, very few fund
presentations include a competitive analysis. Most VCs
assume that there is “so much opportunity” that everyone can
live happily.
In building their competitive advantage, VCs can define
their edge based on (a) how they will attract the best found-
ers, (b) stage of investment, (c) sector, (d) target geography,
(e) network of relationships, (f) industry insights, and (g) past
track record.
There is no single factor that defines a competitive edge,
but often it’s a combination of many. “I believe many strategies
are the same, and rarely do funds have a truly ground-breaking
investment strategy,” Igor Rozenblit, LP with a multibillion-
dollar fund pointed out. Most LPs boil down the venture firm’s
competitive advantage to one question: “Why would founders
want to work with you?”
CAsE sTUDY: sOLO gP gOEs INsTITUTIONAL
When Paul Arnold started to test his appetite for venture, he
had already paid his dues and done his time. After his stint at
McKinsey, Paul had joined a rapidly growing venture-backed
technology company, which raised over $200 million and is
valued over a billion dollars, a unicorn in venture parlance.
Yet as he tried to navigate his way into venture firms, he
found it challenging. One VC told him bluntly, “Every venture

-- 136 of 546 --

CAsE sTUDY: sOLO gP gOEs INsTITUTIONAL 	107
firm out there is like a dysfunctional family. Don’t waste
your time.”
The next day, Paul decided to strike it out on his own and
start his own fund — Switch Ventures. Having grown up in
Wyoming, his soft approach, thoughtful yet understated and
low-key style, was engaging, and founders flocked around
him. But some LPs would dismiss him for not “demonstrating
enough passion.”
At Switch Ventures (Exhibit 11.5), Paul developed a
data-driven approach to identify the founders who will
outperform in building stellar companies. Fund I was on
track to generate 62 percent IRR while the top quartile for
the same vintage year was at 10 percent. The top 5 percent
of the performers were at 44 percent. Cambridge Associates
has ranked Switch as the second-best fund of the vintage.
This performance got the attention of a fund of funds,
which jumped in to anchor Switch Fund II with a 10 percent
commitment. “It took over a dozen meetings and two years
of relationship building,” says Paul. “The LPs’ biggest area
of concern was (a) can you scale your investment check sizes,
and (b) does this have potential to be a long-term partnership?”
On selling to LPs and fundraising, Paul says, “A real pro
would have a very organized sales process to bring LPs
through the funnel. But I am terrible at this part of the
business. I just focused on what I am good at — making
investments.”
Exhibit 11.5 Switch Ventures.
Fund I 	Fund II
Fund Size 	$5 m 	$25 m
Portfolio 	17 companies 	25 companies
Average investment 	$150,000 	$1 m
LP mix 	Individuals and families 	50% institutions and the rest from
individuals/families
100% LP retention from Fund I

-- 137 of 546 --

108 	DEfININg YOUR fUND’s INvEsTMENT sTRATEgY
Lessons from a Solo VC
• 	On fund strategy: Don’t differentiate yourself for mar-
keting reasons. That never holds up over the long-term.
Find differentiation that you truly believe will beat the
market, and that you are positioned to execute.
• 	On fundraising: It’s a long game. Talk to the right LPs.
Family offices may be able to make a decision within a
few weeks. But large allocators like endowments take
years of trust and relationship building. Set reasonable
targets. You lay the foundation before you scale AUM.
• 	On investing: It’s a power law game. Understand
what it means to be cultivating outliers. It’s very likely
that a single investment or two in your fund will be all
that matters. Don’t miss them! Have conviction. A herd
investor will at best achieve mediocre results.
It’s easy to be a dick. Don’t be dismissive of founders.
Don’t ghost. Respect their time. Recognize the inherent power
dynamics at play and don’t abuse them. If you need a reminder,
recall LPs who might have done this to you and course correct.
A quick no is much better than a long maybe. Treat each deal
like it’s your only one. Bet on founders that inspire in some
way. NEVER invest in someone whose integrity is suspect.
And get lucky, but separate good/bad decisions from
good/bad luck. How can we improve our thinking in a busi-
ness where it’s easy to confuse luck and skill? The problem is
that most investors learn from their outcomes and not from
evaluating their decisions, regardless of the outcome. They
take the wrong lessons from experience when they have a
loss (which happens all the time in VC). This loss could be
due to a bad decision AND a bad outcome, or a good decision
AND a bad outcome. The key is to assess decisions (instead of
just outcomes) or we end up with a flawed learning process,
where many of the narrative fallacies of the business originate.
• 	On building an institutional grade fund: Overinvest
a bit on infrastructure: back-office, audits, legal. If

-- 138 of 546 --

CAsE sTUDY: OvERsUBsCRIBED fIRsT fUND 	109
CAsE sTUDY: OvERsUBsCRIBED fIRsT fUND —
HOW A $30M fUND ENDED UP WITH OvER $100M
IN COMMITMENTs
Nigerian-born Adeyemi Ajao had built and sold two com-
panies and made over 50 seed investments when he started
to mull over raising his first fund. “Maybe $30m to $40m
fund would be a good start,” he told me over coffee when
I first met him. Ade had built his first startup in Madrid,
Spain — a social app called Tuenti, which soon became like
the Facebook of Spain and was snapped up by Telefónica for
a tidy sum of $100 million. One of the restless kind, Ade then
decided to get an MBA at Stanford University. While getting
acquainted with the heated belly of the startups in Silicon
Valley, Ade got bored and founded another company called
Identified — which was a career networking site targeting
young professionals, built on the Facebook platform. Busi-
ness software company Workday soon came knocking, and
you want to be in this for the long haul, it comes back
around. Make a 20-year plan, and then start walking.
Have strong mentors who will go to bat for you. Ideally,
find people who are the best in your business and 10–20
years ahead of you in the journey. Your reputation is the most
valuable thing you have.
• 	On building momentum with LPs: I did what I was
good at — making great investments. And by sharing
my performance with Cambridge Associates, I got an
outside independent source of authority that could say
compare my performance.
On staying tenacious through dark times of fundrais-
ing: Early on, I knew where I wanted to be in 5 and 20 years,
which I think made it easy to work through the small things
along the way. And my wife was very supportive and trust-
ing (sorry, but she’s taken).

-- 139 of 546 --

110 	Defining Your funD’s investment strategY
Following the Power-Law of Returns: Success
Begets Success
Paul Arnold of Switch Ventures believes that there are only
three truly distinct venture fund strategies, and all of them
boil down to one point: Can you change the distribution
of the companies in which you invest? Among the many
approaches in venture capital, there are fundamentally only
three ways to do this. The best funds pursue all of them.
1. Add value.
2. Source better.
3. Invest better.
That’s it. Everything else is tactics and execution. Any
strategy that doesn’t achieve one of these is puffery, market-
ing, or confusion. The power law of returns — where very
few companies generate solid outcomes — dominates startup
investing, as seen in the data presented in Exhibit 11.4 by Co-
relation Ventures. After analyzing 21,640 companies between
2004 and 2013, we can see some interesting patterns.
US Venture Return Multiple (By % of financings)
65.0%
25.0%
0-1X 	1X-5X 	5X-10X 	10X-20X 	20X-50X 	50X or more
6.0% 2.5% 	1.1% 	0.4%
Exhibit 11.4 The power law of venture returns.

-- 140 of 546 --

(continued)
Nothing 	is 	more 	determinative 	of 	a 	fund’s 	suc-
cess. Power-law distribution is the architecture of the
whole game.
I measure any investing approach against its impact on
the power-law distribution. This is the acid test of what is
actually effective. And while it is true that adding value,
sourcing better, and investing better are all good strategies
for other investing situations, the effects, especially of 2 and
3, are especially significant in venture where the power curve
has a large exponent. Most VCs invest somewhat randomly
along the power curve of opportunities they see. Over short
periods of time, this randomness can result in good or bad
funds. Over longer periods, mediocrity will set in as their
investments regress to the mean. They will have weak per-
sistence of performance.
Improving portfolio company operations is the most
common approach. Recruitment, marketing, partnerships,
sale, operations, and board support are common areas to
help. Most often, this takes the form of coaching found-
ers or rolling up your sleeves to help them get work done.
Some funds institutionalize value-add through software or
platform teams. Startup studios are interesting, blurring the
lines between founders and investors. Adding value is abso-
lutely necessary — it’s the promise to your founders to be
their partner. And it earns you the right to be involved with
great founders. Ultimately, great founders in great markets
build great companies. You won’t make it in venture if you
don’t work with them. And you won’t work with them if
you don’t bring value to the table. For founders, an inves-
tor’s ability to add value is obviously important. Great
founders are choosing their investors and want to bring in
people who will help build the company. Of the three strate-
gies, adding value is the least unique in impact here. In a
much flatter distribution, as you see in, say, leveraged-buy-
out private equity, adding value will create about the same
level of value that it will in the power-law distribution. The
CAsE sTUDY: OvERsUBsCRIBED fIRsT fUND 	111

-- 141 of 546 --

112 	DEfININg YOUR fUND’s INvEsTMENT sTRATEgY
next two strategies, however, have markedly higher impacts
in the power-curve setting.
Sourcing better rescales the distribution of the power
law, as seen in the graph. Even a random selection of invest-
ments from a better-sourced distribution of companies will
have a higher expected return than an average venture fund.
Fishing in a better pond can make as much (or more) differ-
ence as being a better fisherman. A classic way to source bet-
ter is to build a better network. This works for firms with a
strong general reputation. It can also work if you are deep in
a particular group of exceptional people — say, globally elite
artificial intelligence researchers. Focusing on a geographi-
cal region can create strong networks if a fund establishes
regional dominance.
Quantitative venture investing can have a huge impact
on picking the right investments. Admittedly, I’m biased.
A predictive-analytic approach to teams, companies, and
industries stacks your hand from the start. It changes all the
investment odds. This takes much work to do well but has
attractive returns for the effort. Outbound sourcing is an
underappreciated approach in early-stage venture. Because
inbound referrals are plentiful, investors often ignore out-
bound efforts. The key is being able to target founders who
actually are exceptional. But if you can, why would you not
make sure you are talking with the best out there? Switch
aspires to take several of these approaches: using a mathe-
matical and predictive approach to sourcing, building high-
quality and selective networks of founders that spin out
many great companies, and proactively reaching out to the
founders who excite us most.
Invest better and you end up in bigger winners. It
increases the frequency in the upper tail of outcomes. Picking
better is the dominant way to achieve outsized results at the
seed stage. And the most important factor for picking better
(continued)

-- 142 of 546 --

is, by far, good judgment. Good judgment is hard to describe.
It’s a somewhat ephemeral quality, which only reveals itself
over time. As Bill Gurley of Benchmark says, picking is the sin-
gle most important quality he looks for in a new investing partner.
Picking better is also a function of doing research and devel-
oping insights. Having a correct industry thesis is a perfect
example. If you can predict major technology and economic
trends, you will be rewarded with more hits. Art and science
(or guts and brains) both play into picking. And both are
hard. In most firms, there is a huge variance of performance
between partners.
Access becomes a much more important factor in the
later stages of venture. This is because the winners start to
become very obvious as time goes on. Most Series C inves-
tors have very similar lists of the top 10 companies they
would like to invest in. Brand and reputation have increas-
ing payoff as you move into later stages. Founders want
to work with VCs who invest better for the same reasons
they want to work with VCs who source better — they want
people to associate them with the best. It sends a positive
signal to customers, employees, and other investors. And
it’s a more valuable network to be a part of.
PUTTING IT TO WORK
There are many ways to execute, and the winning approach
depends on the investment stage and people involved.
While all three strategies add portfolio value, resources are
limited, and a fund should think through which one can
add the most for them. Finally, there is some logical order to
developing capabilities. For example, if you can’t source at
least some great deals, you really won’t be able to pick great
ones, either.
Grounding venture strategy in power-law thinking has
consistently been helpful for me, and hopefully, it can help
others add a frame to their approaches, too.
CAsE sTUDY: OvERsUBsCRIBED fIRsT fUND 	113

-- 143 of 546 --

114 	DEfININg YOUR fUND’s INvEsTMENT sTRATEgY
after selling Identified to Workday, he ended up launching
Workday Ventures, a corporate venture arm. Identified had
pioneered the use of gamification strategies to make profes-
sional networking fun and engaging for its users, who are
almost all below the age of 30 years old.
But as market timing and luck would have it, Ade soon
found a partner in his friend TJ Nahigian. After spending five
years in the investment world with venture firms like Accel,
Summit Partners, and Coatue, TJ had the founder itch and
formed a company called Jobr, a mobile app that was like
Tinder — swipe right to connect with recruiters. Ade knew
enough about the hiring space, and TJ opened up his previ-
ous round to bring Ade as an investor in Jobr. After Jobr was
acquired by Monster, Ade and TJ reaped the rewards of the
journey — a partnership in the next big thing. “My next leap in
the world of venture came with Ade” says TJ.
As the two started to put their heads together, they con-
cluded that a $75 million fund would be a better target. They
decided to call it Base 10 partners — after the decimal system
of 10 digits, while pursuing their investment in the world
of binary outcomes. Between Ade and TJ, they had done 70
investments, 15 exits, of which 10 were valued over $1 billion.
This, combined with their entrepreneurial experience, created
a strong foundation.
Ade, who was in the middle of planning his marriage, would
find TJ hanging out with him and his fiancée at most times.
As these two major events occurred — his marriage as well as
launch of the fund — they would joke that starting a fund is no
different from starting a new relationship. You have to comple-
ment each other’s strengths. The analytical TJ shrugs his shoul-
ders, saying, “I don’t do feelings,” which balances Ade, whose
high EQ and love is evident for his founders and LPs alike.
Both would dig into their networks for their Fund I, work
tirelessly, and build their thesis (see the Appendix for sample).
They would end up with much more than $75m. Base10 Part-
ners Fund I closed at $135 million (Exhibit 11.6). And within
two years of launch, their Fund II was being raised, thanks

-- 144 of 546 --

CAsE sTUDY: sTARTINg ALL OvER. . . 	115
to the stellar performance of Fund I. It was considered to be
in the top 2 percent of all funds of the vintage year. “We are
highly data driven, work as hard as founders, bring opera-
tional efficiencies to our companies like a private equity fund,
and serve our LPs by delivering the higher returns of a VC
fund” says Ade.
Not many first-time funds have had such a solid start. But
the foundational elements — team, strategy, market timing,
and, above all, performance — worked to their advantage.
CAsE sTUDY: sTARTINg ALL OvER. . .
Peter Bell had seen it all — the rise and fall of the dot-com
wave at Highland Capital, which started in Boston and soon
had a global presence. The sheer scale and cross-cultural team
dynamics, not to mention geographic and stage preferences of
each region, economic macro-factors, and capital flows was
not something he enjoyed. And so he started all over again
from scratch and launched Amity Ventures. “I hired one of my
partners, CJ Reim, when he was 19 — his intellectual curiosity
was off the charts. He built his thesis on the Connected Home
vertical over a period of one year and invested in Smart Things,
a company that got acquired by Samsung for $200 million,
which was a very nice outcome. And my other partner, Patrick
Exhibit 11.6 Growth of Base 10 Ventures.
Fund I 	Fund II
Fund size 	$135 m 	$200 m
Portfolio 	18 companies 	18 companies
Stage of investment 	12 seed stages companies and
6 Series A
No change in strategy
Average investment 	$500,000 (Seed)
Up to $5m (Series A)
No change
LP mix 	Endowments, Silicon Valley entrepreneurs 	Endowments, international
institutional investors, and
entrepreneurs

-- 145 of 546 --

116 	DEfININg YOUR fUND’s INvEsTMENT sTRATEgY
Yang, did the same for autonomous vehicles and invested in
Nutonomy. That company got snagged for $450 million, mak-
ing our investors happy,” says Peter.
Even if CJ Reim did not have operating experience, his
ability to engage with founders and build a portfolio is com-
pelling. “We have found our place, by being responsive to
the founders.” For Peter, starting from scratch was not easy.
Most LPs try to pick new fund managers, as they do not have
to dig into years of track records and team dynamics. But
Amity raised $75 million and has started to build a strong
portfolio. “We built the firm on three precepts — see the best
opportunities, win them with strength, and partner to make
our founders successful.”
CAsE sTUDY: WHO HAs TIME fOR THIs? I DON’T
NEED NO LPs ANYMORE. . .
In what can be described as a victim of his own success, this
fund got started but never took off. “It took me well over a year
to build my investment thesis, gather the market data, and con-
struct my fund documents,” says this Silicon Valley GP, who
prefers to remain anonymous. “After developing the pitch
deck, I did two things in parallel — I started to raise the fund
and make build my portfolio of investments to put my strat-
egy in action. This was to demonstrate that I had the ability
to (a) build my thesis, (b) find the best companies, and (c) win
an allocation in hotly contested rounds. My life was extremely
stressful during these times — I borrowed money from as many
friends as I could, maxed out my credit card debt, and became a
madman. In one situation, a lender asked for my primary home
as collateral. My wife concluded I was depressed and was put-
ting the family at risk. These were retirement savings that were
being put in these high-risk illiquid investments. These would
not even serve as collateral in a pawn shop, she reminded him.”
The GP must have pitched 50 LPs during this time. He says
that not one would give him a straight answer. Their processes

-- 146 of 546 --

were opaque, and there was this “man behind the curtain”
thing. He says, “One of them didn’t even have any money
but strung me along for six months. She was trying to raise
her fund of funds at the same time and was using my deck to
show off to her own LPs that she had access to great managers.
What a scammer! In one family office in Chicago, the head of
the family almost yelled at me — ‘Why do you think you will
be successful?’” In another strange situation, the GP says, “I
was invited to meet this hedge fund fat cat at his fancy home
sitting on a five-acre plot in upstate New York. When I reached
his front door, no one answered the doorbell. This was a remote
area and there was no cell signal. I couldn’t even call anyone. I
stood there feeling like a lurker and a petty beggar, waiting for
the proverbial doors to open. But then it started to pour . . . I
was drenched standing there and could not even summon an
Uber. That was it – I called off the whole fundraising charade
and gave up.”
The GP continues: “Two years after my first investment, I
got a 10X exit — a nice fat check — liquidity. I had invested in
a startup at a $6 million valuation, and it got acquired for $60
million. Which was nice. I was able to pay off some of my debt.
And within 12 months, another company was sold. My mod-
est investment made me rich. And the best part — I did not
have to share 80% of my profits with any LPs.”
And then the fun began. The GP started to get inbound
calls from LPs as soon as these exits occurred. “They, who
never believed in me when I needed them most, were now
chasing me. Ah . . . the best form of revenge is success. Such
is the irony all founders and first-time GPs face — once you
are successful, they all come running to you and groveling.
Who needs them now? My portfolio is well above five times
cash-on-cash. The flywheel has started, and I will never ever
raise any outside capital.” The GP says that the LP world is
filled with lazy, opportunistic, fickle, and weak people who
“should not room with the brave. They should work for the
government, collect their paychecks, and stick to a two-hour,
low-risk workday.”
CAsE sTUDY: WHO HAs TIME fOR THIs? 	117

-- 147 of 546 --



-- 148 of 546 --

12
119
From any institutional investor’s or limited partner’s (LP’s)
perspective, a venture capital partnership is like being locked
in a 10-year blind pool — a long relationship in which the
investors have very little control, limited ability to exit the
relationship, and no clarity of outcomes. Thus, investors seek
proven fund managers. Exhibit 12.1 depicts the stacking order
of professionals.
EVALUATING FUND MANAGERS
A proven fund manager is one who has generated consist-
ent returns across multiple economic cycles. Few practition-
ers have demonstrated the ability to source opportunities,
invest capital over multiple rounds, add tangible value as a
board member, and generate exits. Proven managers do not
have to amplify or sell their background, expertise, or scientific
domain knowledge. LPs don’t really care how they got there
as long as they rack up the returns. Rookies eager to enter the
business have to establish their credentials.
If a newcomer has entrepreneurial experience — started a
company, raised multiple venture rounds, and led the company
to an exit — the fundraising path becomes a bit easier. A dem-
onstrated nose for choosing good investments is what matters.
Investment Team
Diligence

-- 149 of 546 --

120 	INVESTMENT TEAM DILIGENcE
“If you belong in the ‘first-time manager/first-time fund’
box, what are the investors going to base their decisions on?”
asks Kelly DePonte. Some investors are blunt and discourage
rookie fund managers. “After all, why should you train to
become a venture capitalist on my nickel?” Others are quick
to point out that it takes about $10 million of investor capital
to train a general partner (GP). “I’d let the other LPs pay for
this education,” they say. “Experienced managers who have
attained returns over multiple funds are attractive to any LP,”
says DePonte. 1
Some key criteria for evaluating fund managers and the
investment team include the following:
• 	Performance. Does the individual have an investing track
record? Are the managers proven top-quartile perform-
ers? Emerging? Or somewhere in between?
• 	Team skills:
• 	What are the operating qualifications and background?
Has the individual played a relevant role in an oper-
ating capacity?
INVESTMENT
EXPERTISE
ENTREPRENEURIAL
EXPERTISE
DOMAIN EXPERTISE
GENERALIST
Consistent & repeatable
performance via multiple
investments. Generated
returns over several
economic cycles
Has started companies, raised
multiple rounds of capital, managed
VC-backed board and start-up to exit
Strong awareness of certain sectors,
trends, and opportunities
Broad-based knowledge of VC business
consulting/financial/transactional
backgrounds
Exhibit 12.1 GP expertise.

-- 150 of 546 --

TEAM DYNAMIcS: STABILITY, SKILL SET, AND ALIGNMENT 	121
• 	What is the individual’s domain expertise: Is she a
generalist or a specialist? Can she spot a trend or
analyze opportunities?
• 	Does the individual have any experience as a board
member? If yes, describe the person’s specific
value/role.
• 	What are the role and investment focus of each indi-
vidual? In larger multisector/multistage firms, this
criterion has higher importance.
TEAM DYNAMIcS: STABILITY, SKILL SET,
AND ALIGNMENT
Investors assess the team stability, alignment, and dynamics
using a number of techniques. Team stability — the ability of
the partners to work together through thick and thin — is con-
sidered a substantial risk with unproven managers or newer
funds. Lindel Eakman, who manages fund investments for
Foundry Group, says, “My primary goal is to understand
the partnership dynamic.” Lindel has seen partnerships fall
apart due to diverging career paths, team chemistry, and
health issues. Christy Richardson, director of Private Invest-
ments, Hewlett Foundation, says, “We look for team dynam-
ics and want to make sure the team will stay together for
the next two to three fund cycles — the connective tissue is
economic split, but I worry about relationships that have not
been stress-tested through challenging times. In a rising tide,
everyone is happy and gets along fine. Teams only get tested
in tough times.”
Alignment of interests shift when senior managers choose
to retain most of the profits, leading to potential break-ups of
younger partners. Finally, how the members of teams align
with each other with respect to roles and responsibilities is a
key question LPs often ask.
Here, we describe stability, alignment, and skill sets (soft
skills, specialists, and social networks) to help develop deeper
insights into a fund manager’s due diligence.

-- 151 of 546 --

122 	INVESTMENT TEAM DILIGENcE
Stability and Alignment: Will the Family Stay Together?
Newly minted partnerships are seen as risky. Team cohesion
or stability risk is paramount in such firms. If partners cannot
get along and quit for any reason, it can be a death knell for
the fund. LPs frequently assess each individual’s background
and expertise, and, more importantly, how these cohesively tie
together to form a symphony.
Redundant skill sets or incompatible personalities are red
flags. But while functional attributes can be easily ascertained,
no LP can predict whether a marriage can last. Thus, the first-
time funds have to demonstrate track records as well as intan-
gible elements like cohesion and stability.
To assess team cohesion, LPs look at the following:
• 	Alignment of incentives. Compensation structure, respon-
sibilities, and rewards for each team member. Just as
VCs ask for a cap table for their management teams to
assess option pools for leading team members, LPs often
ask for a view of carry split to ensure that the economics
are aligned.
• 	Duration of relationship. How long have they worked
together? What circumstances or crises have strength-
ened these relationships?
• 	Alignment with LP’s financial goals. Fund managers own
capital or “skin in the game” — what is the amount of fund
managers’ investment as a percentage of their net worth?
• 	Distractions. What are sources of other income, time hori-
zon to retirement? In one fund, the partners were con-
ducting part-time investment banking activities. This
became a huge distraction, as it offered current income
and short-term gains over long-term carry.
• 	Stability. Clint Harris, managing partner at Grove Street
Advisors, says, “Are the junior members in a fund talk-
ing to headhunters? If they are, then you know there
is something wrong. . . . The team member can make
five phone calls and he will get an honest answer very
quickly. . . .”2

-- 152 of 546 --

TEAM DYNAMIcS: STABILITY, SKILL SET, AND ALIGNMENT 	123
Stability and alignment of interest are closely tied — should
a senior partner be unwilling to share meaningful portions of
carry, the junior team members will often vote with their feet
and get out the door.
Exhibit 12.2, a format developed by Pension Consulting
Alliance (PCA), demonstrates alignment of interest of vari-
ous principals in an early-stage fund. Red flags include the
following:
1. No significant capital contribution from fund managers.
2. Disproportionate carry allocation, especially to sen-
ior partners.
3. Excessive compensation from other sources.
Rock Star Partner Comes on Board
GPs need to treat their partners with respect both on and off
stage. At a recent meeting, I complimented a senior partner
for having attracted a star. He leaned forward and whis-
pered, “You don’t understand, he is our servant.”*
*From an anonymous LP with investments in over 50 venture funds
and over $1 billion under advisement.
Exhibit 12.2 Sample Format: Assessing Alignment of Interest.
Principal
Name
Expected
Capital
Contribution
Carry
Points
(20%)
Total Annual
Expected
Compensation
Carried
Interest
Compensation
From This
Fund
From
Other
Sources
Managing Director 1 	$450,000 	10% 	$400,000 	None 	$10,000,000
Managing Director 2 	$450,000 	8% 	$300,000 	None 	$8,000,000
Principal 	$100,000 	2% 	$200,000 	None 	$2,000,000

-- 153 of 546 --

124 	INVESTMENT TEAM DILIGENcE
Identifying complementary Skill Sets
Venture capital investments call for a varied skill set in a team:
raising capital, sourcing investment opportunities, adding
value as board members, and leading exits. These skills are
prefaced by entrepreneurial expertise, technological strengths,
and the ability to perceive future market trends and maintain
an even keel in somewhat ambiguous and rough times. LPs
also closely look at the duration and the intensity of GP
interactions — as investment professionals, not golf buddies.
Exhibit 12.3 shows a complementary skill set of a team at
an early-stage health care fund. Note the ability of the manag-
ing directors to attract junior as well as senior partners across
two separate fund cycles.
The Importance of Soft Skills
In a survey of over 145 leading VCs (venture capitalists), lead-
ing practitioners agreed that listening skills were considered
more important for success in venture capital than quantita-
tive skills.
The skills that were rated most important were as follows:
• 	Listening skills
• 	Ability to recruit talented management
• 	Qualitative analysis skills
• 	Coaching/counseling/advising skills
“You’ve got to be a good listener. I find if the venture capi-
talist does all the talking, he doesn’t learn very much about the
people he’s thinking about investing in. Very important to lis-
ten . . . and judge who looks and feels like they have the mak-
ings of making a real company. Eventually it becomes instinct
if you do it often enough,” remarked Paul “Pete” Bancroft, for-
mer CEO of Bessemer Securities and former chair of National
Venture Capital Association.3
Financial and technical skills were rated least important
by practitioners, while possessing a CEO perspective was

-- 154 of 546 --

TEAM DYNAMIcS: STABILITY, SKILL SET, AND ALIGNMENT 	125

-- 155 of 546 --

126 	INVESTMENT TEAM DILIGENcE
considered a valuable asset.4 While conducting reference
checks with portfolio company CEOs, LPs are able to identify
GP strengths in these areas.
LPs also are able to grasp a deeper sense of the culture
of the firm. “Naturally, GPs project that all is great within
the firm, but while talking to associates, I get a different pic-
ture. I have learned how to get to the bottom of that quickly,”
explains Christopher Rizik. One institutional LP who has
made investments in funds across the country would set aside
time to speak with the front-office staff, including the admin-
istrative staff and the receptionist. “These people may seem
irrelevant but are on site every day. They see the entire family
at work — the senior partners and the junior partners — and
how they interact with entrepreneurs. And they are candid in
sharing the true picture.”
Generalists versus Specialists
In a study, Paul A. Gompers et al. demonstrated a strong posi-
tive relationship between the degree of specialization by indi-
viduals at a firm and the firm’s success. A specialist investment
professional in a specialist firm will outperform a generalist.
The poorer performance by generalists appeared to be due to
both an inefficient allocation of funding across industries and
poor selection of investments within industries, concluded
the authors. In other words, the generalists made bad choices
across the board. But if you put a specialist individual in a gen-
eralist firm, the performance was weak.5 Thus, the LP empha-
sis on domain expertise is intuitively high. Another interesting
study of 482 venture practitioners in 222 first-time venture
funds asserts the same proposition: The specialists outperform
the generalists. The specialists were superior, especially when it
came to early-stage investments. The study also concludes that
the two strongest predictors of fund performance were entre-
preneurial experience and domain expertise.
Yet the predominance of MBAs in the business of venture
capital is evident. In 80 larger venture capital firms, of the 615
general partners, 58 percent had MBAs. Of these, 64 percent

-- 156 of 546 --

TEAM DYNAMIcS: STABILITY, SKILL SET, AND ALIGNMENT 	127
came from Harvard, Stanford, and Wharton.6 But an MBA is
not necessarily an indicator of strong performance. On the con-
trary, a research study shows that funds with more MBAs on
board performed poorly as compared to others. “We found at
least one place where having an MBA can be a disadvantage,”
summarized the authors.7
Vc is a Relationship Business
Who you know matters, in venture investments as well as in
life. Access new opportunities quickly, conduct due diligence,
syndicate investments, and accelerate exits — all of these can
become a lot easier within a strong network. Do strong net-
works among venture capitalists improve their bargaining
power over that of entrepreneurs? According to a study, yes
indeed!8 LPs often assess a VC’s ability to break in the elite net-
works, for syndication and follow-on investments, and ascribe
an intangible value to a VC’s networks.
For any LP, venture capital networks are an indicator of
sector expertise and financial strength. Needless to say, the
stronger networks were able to extract value from a pricing
perspective: lower valuations were evident in more densely
networked markets. Empirical evidence that better networked VCs
enjoy better performance has already been established,9 but lower
valuation at the point of entry was also identified as a function
of networks.
“My success, frankly, was mostly due to two things: One,
as a CFO . . . I was a corporate finance expert at a time when
biotech and medical devices were becoming very capital-
intensive models. . . . I had an expertise that the industry
needed; and I had these great relationships. Everybody needs
an angle, so that was my angle; I knew people,”10 Alan Frazier,
founder, Frazier Healthcare Ventures, once remarked.
Steve Bird, of Focus Ventures, writes on the importance of
networks in the business of venture capital. “Quality of man-
agement” really means the quality of the relationships that GPs
build over years in the business. Management means forging rela-
tionships with other top VCs that allow both parties to repeatedly

-- 157 of 546 --

128 	INVESTMENT TEAM DILIGENcE
form syndicates on the best deals. It means building a network
among the entrepreneurial community so that the GP hears
about a revolutionary technology when it’s still in the lab, not
after the company has landed its first round of financing. It
means knowing important customers, suppliers, and scien-
tists that can help a fledgling company reach its first quarter
of profitability. And it means building trust with the broader
financial community so that when the time comes for a port-
folio company to get a loan, raise more capital, or go public,
company management doesn’t have to re-create the wheel.11
In summary, LPs want to know if and how the invest-
ment team stays motivated — can they outperform at all
times? “Doug Leone, partner at Sequoia Capital, would say
that ‘we have a problem at Sequoia — we have been success-
ful.’ The team has ingrained an ethos of zero overconfidence
and an utter lack of hubris. They follow the ‘only the paranoid
survive’ motto and are constantly evolving with time, staying
hungry and agile,” says a long-time LP in Sequoia Capital,
Christy Richardson, director of Private Investments at Hewlett
Foundation.

-- 158 of 546 --

13
129
What is the correct fund size? How much should you raise?
Ask Masayoshi San of Softbank and he will raise his hands up
in the air: “A hundred billion,” he might say. The short answer
is raise as much as you can, to effectively execute on your
investment strategy.
A bottoms-up approach can start with the stage of invest-
ments, and capital needed to build a well-balanced portfolio.
Let’s look at the point of investment — what will be the typi-
cal first check size? What capital reserves will be set aside for
future/follow-on investments? What stage of investment as
well as ownership and dilution are you modeling for?
Some 	fund 	managers 	adopt 	a 	highly 	concentrated
approach — fewer companies with much higher ownership —
while other fund managers build a large portfolio with small
ownership. Some sectors — such as life sciences — tend to be
capital intensive compared to technology.
The size of follow-on investments with the view of main-
taining ownership can impact fund returns.
Exhibit 13.1 summarizes the factors that impact fund size.
While the life of the fund is legally established for 10 years,
the capital is deployed during the investment period, typi-
cally the first 5 years. Fund managers actively seek to invest
and build the portfolio during this period. The goal is to gen-
erate returns rapidly, say, within 4–6 years from the time of
investment.
Fund Size and Portfolio
Construction

-- 159 of 546 --

130 	Fund Size and PortFolio ConStruCtion
Let us look at a seed fund, say $10 million in size
(Exhibit 13.2). Typically, management fees of an average 2.0
percent per annum of assets under management are applied
for the investment period of the fund, say five years. After
this investment period, the fees drop down each year, as
the portfolio is in maintenance mode. For the sake of sim-
plicity, let us assume that management fees are $1 million.
With investable capital of $9 million, assume you will build
a portfolio of nine companies and make three new invest-
ments each year.
Before you start to deploy capital, it is important to model
and project ownership, entry valuations, and exit outcomes.
You have to establish disciplined thresholds of ownership and
Exhibit 13.1 Factors Determining Fund Size.
Risk 	Remarks
Target sector 	Funds targeting capital-efficient sectors such as technology/software can be
smaller, while funds targeting capital-intensive sectors need larger amounts.
Stage of investment 	Seed and early-stage funds are smaller, versus growth stage funds.
Number of portfolio
companies
Typical portfolios can be small and concentrated with 10–12 companies or large
with as many as 30–50 companies.
Reserves/Follow-on
investments
Some funds reserve at least 2X capital for follow-on rounds, to maintain ownership
across multiple rounds, while other funds invest more capital in earlier stages,
to get as much ownership at lower cost.
Geographic dynamics 	In certain regions, capital supply and demand dynamics are different. In Silicon
Valley, due to large demand for capital in a small, concentrated region, fund
sizes can be larger. In other regions, investors have to deploy capital across
multiple locations, increasing operational complexity.
Potential to generate
target returns
Multiple studies show that larger funds tend to generate lower returns. However,
fund managers often try to design fund sizes driven by fee calculations as
opposed to the ability to generate returns.
Exhibit 13.2 Portfolio Assumptions.
Fund size 	$10,000,000
Fund management fees 	$1,000,000
Total investable capital 	$9,000,000
Portfolio (Total # of companies) 	9
Follow-on investments in portfolio companies 	3

-- 160 of 546 --

Fund Size and PortFolio ConStruCtion 	131
ensure that you do not get too carried away by hot deals in super-
priced rounds. In the following ownership modeling exercise
(Exhibit 13.3), we take industry averages and see that a typical
$500,000 investment gets us a 6.25 percent ownership in the
company at seed stage. As the next (series A) round occurs,
we purchase an additional 4.84 percent for $1.5 million and
have invested $2 million in a company. We now own 9.8 per-
cent of this company. Some funds will cap their risk by estab-
lishing a ceiling of no more than 10–15 percent of the fund will
be invested in one company. Let us commit this cardinal sin of
investing 20 percent in a company for the sake of simplicity
and test the portfolio. At series B, we are tapped out and do
not invest further. Our ownership gets diluted down to 7.2
percent at this round.
It is important to pace your investments over time, as mar-
ket conditions change. Many an eager investor has jumped
into this business with much enthusiasm and deployed too
much too soon. Being disciplined and patient matters. At an
average investment of $500,000 per company, deploying $1.5
million, the fund would have deployed 50 percent of its invest-
able capital in the first three years in nine portfolio companies.
Further, let us assume that three of these nine companies start
to grow nicely, and you deploy an additional follow-on invest-
ment of $1.5 million in each portfolio company between year
three and year five (Exhibit 13.4).
Exhibit 13.3 Ownership Assumptions.
Seed 	Series A 	Series B
Premoney valuation 	$6,000,000 	$25,000,000 	$40,000,000
Round size 	$2,000,000 	$6,000,000 	$15,000,000
Fund investment 	$500,000 	$1,500,000 	$0
Postmoney valuation 	$8,000,000 	$31,000,000 	$55,000,000
Round dilution 	25% 	19% 	27%
Fund ownership 	6.25% 	5.04% 	7.2%
New ownership purchased by fund 	4.84% 	0.00%
Postround total fund ownership 	6.25% 	9.88% 	7.18%

-- 161 of 546 --

132 	Fund Size and PortFolio ConStruCtion
In making return assumptions, look at industry data to
understand typical exit outcomes and develop your model
conservatively. The mean value of exits is in the range of $293 mil-
lion. 1 As you start to aim for higher exit values, the probability of
generating returns drops. In Exhibit 13.5, we assume exits can
occur at a low value of $25 million, mid-range of $100 million,
and the $300 million.
Further, we assume that of the nine companies, we will
have three as total losses, three exits in the $25 million low
range, two exits in the mid-range of $100 million, and one exit
at $300 million. These exits are modeled out to occur between
years 7–10, generating an internal rate of return (IRR) of 30.1%
and 4.36X gross cash-on-cash (C-on-C) return (Exhibit 13.6).
Exhibit 13.4 Portfolio Construction.
Year 	Year 1 	Year 2 	Year 3 	Year 4 	Year 5
Number of new
investments
3 	3 	3 	0 	0
Amount per
investment
$500,000 	$500,000 	$500,000 	$0 	$0
Subtotal – Capital
invested (A)
$1,500,000 	$1,500,000 	$1,500,000 	$0 	$0
Follow-on investments
Number of
follow-on
investments
1 	1 	1
Amount per
follow-on
investment
$1,500,000 	$1,500,000 	$1,500,000
Subtotal – Capital
invested (B)
$1,500,000 	$1,500,000 	$1,500,000
Total invested
(A+B)
($1,500,000) 	($1,500,000) 	($3,000,000) 	($1,500,000) 	($1,500,000)
Exhibit 13.5 Exit Values.
Low Range 	Mid Range 	Upper Range
Acquisition value 	$25,000,000 	$100,000,000 	$300,000,000
Fund return 	$1,562,500 	$9,879,032 	$21,554,252
Cash-on-Cash multiple 	3.13 	4.94 	10.78

-- 162 of 546 --

Fund Size and PortFolio ConStruCtion 	133
The distribution waterfall would look as follows:
distribution
Gross cash-on-cash return 	$43,656,067
Principal to LPs 	$10,000,000
80% carry to LPs 	$26,924,853
Balance to GP 	$6,731,213
In this example, we modeled for a $10 million fund and its
portfolio of nine companies. The exits are projected in three
separate value outcomes: (1) low range — $25 million; (2) mid-
range — $100 million; and (3) upper range — $300 million.
Despite three total losses, of the six exits, we model one out-
come at $300 million, two at $100 million, and three exits at
$25 million. The projected returns fall in the IRR range of 30%
and 4.36X gross C-on-C return. Put it differently, to achieve this
outcome, a $10 million fund has to generate $575 million of
total portfolio value amongst its six successful exits.
Exhibit 13.6 Exit Range Assumptions and Distribution Waterfall.
# of Companies 	Exit Value 	C-on-C Multiple 	Cash-in 	Cash-out
Upper range 	1 	$300,000,000 	10.78 	$2,000,000 	$21,554,252
Mid-range 	2 	$100,000,000 	4.94 	$4,000,000 	$19,758,065
Low range 	3 	$25,000,000 	3.13 	$750,000 	$2,343,750
Loss 	3 	0 	$2,250,000 	0
$9,000,000 	$43,656,067
Smaller Is Better
Take a typical $400 million fund. To get a 20 percent return
over six years, you have to triple your capital, turning $400
million into $1.2 billion. It’s going to take longer than six
years, and you have to add management fees and carry, so
that $400 million fund roughly has to return $1.5 billion to
the investors to get a 20 percent return. On exit, that fund
will own at most 20 percent of a company. That means that
a $400 million VC fund has to create $7.5 billion of market
value to return $1.5 billion to its LPs in order to deliver a
20 percent return.
—Josh Koppelman, First Round Capital

-- 163 of 546 --

134 	Fund Size and PortFolio ConStruCtion
As we grow the fund size, the pressure to yield high exits
increases. In Exhibit 13.7, we see that for a fund of $50 million,
a 30 percent IRR in 10 years requires a total output of $123 mil-
lion. For a $400 million fund, it’s almost a billion. Probabilistic
thinking combined with market exit data can help develop a
good fund size and portfolio construction strategy.
A fund’s portfolio is a demonstration of fund managers’
ability to execute their own vision. Consider the portfolio con-
struction strategy of an early-stage life sciences company. At
Arboretum Ventures I, a fund of $20 million was established
to focus on the health care sector. This fund size would allow
investments of up to $2 million in 8–10 early-stage compa-
nies. In comparison, a technology fund is expected to invest
in as many as 25–30 companies, as the sector is capital effi-
cient. On the other end of the spectrum is a large, billion-dollar
fund such as Norwest Venture Partners (NVP). NVP targets
multistage (venture and growth stage) companies across the
globe. Technology investments have shorter market cycles and
follow established patterns of capital needs, company matu-
ration, and exit timing. On the other hand, medical devices
and biotech investments require larger amounts of capital and
have longer maturation timelines.
Institutional investors, especially those managing multi-
billion dollars, prefer to invest in funds that are at least $100
million in size. This allows them to maintain efficiency and
manage relationships appropriately.
“The portfolio is your strategy in action: you can touch the port-
folio, taste it, and see it. I spend a lot of my time visiting port-
folio companies. I can tell when something is going well, and
the portfolio companies share the value of VC and how it is
Exhibit 13.7 Fund Size and Gains.
Gains Required in 10 Years to Generate
Fund Size 	15% IRR 	20% IRR 	30% IRR
$50 m 	$38.4 m 	$62.3 m 	$123.5 m
$100 m 	$76.9 m 	$124.6 m 	$247 m
$400 m 	$307.6 m 	$498.4 m 	$988 m

-- 164 of 546 --

Fund Size and PortFolio ConStruCtion 	135
actualized. This is the prism: I see the whole symphony being
played out, and hopefully it is a harmonious interplay of the
various elements,” says Chris Douvos, who has been an insti-
tutional investor for over a decade.
Lisa Edgar of Top Tier Capital Partners summarizes the art
of portfolio management as follows:
As experienced LPs, our decision-making process relies
upon pattern recognition in order to identify the characteris-
tics of success and of failure — something [general partners]
GPs should be able to do, too. What I’m looking for is the
fund manager’s view of which companies look like winners
and which companies aren’t quite cutting it, so that they
can manage the portfolio to support only those that deserve
additional capital. I understand this is an extremely diffi-
cult exercise — especially for very early-stage companies or
when the outcome is truly binary. I would suggest that pick-
ing the winners from the losers — and more importantly,
effectively managing the fund’s capital — is specifically
the role of the GP (and for which the limited partners pay
a management fee). . . . I want to know how the VC’s micro
views on each company and macro view of the exit environment is
directing overall capital allocation. That’s what we call “portfolio
management,” and to LPs, effective portfolio management is one
of the core criteria we use to evaluate managers.2
Key Takeaways
Fund size is a function of portfolio design, target ownership,
market dynamics, and ability to generate returns. It should
not be a function of fee-income and manager lifestyle choices.
A small, high-quality concentrated portfolio is indicative
of a well-designed thesis. A large, scattered portfolio is akin
to a spray-and-pray investment strategy.
Staying disciplined matters — smaller fund sizes can con-
sistently generate outsized returns. However, as investors
taste success, their ego, greed, and hubris often take over,
and soon small funds lose their edge.

-- 165 of 546 --



-- 166 of 546 --

14
137
“By far, performance is the number one reason why we say
no,” says Chris Rizik, who heads fund investments as Renais-
sance Venture Fund. Assessing performance of funds, fund
managers, and the fund’s performance against a set of indus-
try benchmarks is a critical step toward an LP commitment.
At the heart of it, LPs look at fund managers who can engage
in a true partnership. Eric Doppstadt, VP and CIO, Ford Foun-
dation, says, ”My motto is quite simple — “Treat your investors
as partners and your partners as investors.” In other words, try to
form a long-term partnership with your limited partners, and
try to create true ‘skin in the game’ for your general partners.
With this mindset, we seek to operate for the long term, with
our interests aligned with our GPs. We have been with some
managers for almost 50 years. We build these relationships
over time and we feel fortunate that venture capital is one of the
few parts of the financial markets that has not yet become purely
transactional, in which long-term relationships still matter.”
Let us look at the ways LPs rank performance and under-
stand the challenges therein. But before we dive into fund level
performance, let us start with individual-level performance.
INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE AND ATTRIBUTION
At the heart of it, the business of venture capital is akin to
skydiving — small teams form pretty patterns, but each
diver has to hold his or her own. Splinter groups are formed
Performance Analysis

-- 167 of 546 --

138 	PERFORMANCE ANALysIs
frequently. While some glide along, navigating the strong
winds, others often crash. The rest of the divers can do little to
prevent a crashing partner, so they move on and form a differ-
ent pattern. Inherently competitive at an individual level, this
business is one of hero worship and also-rans, where personal
brands often tend to rise above the brand of a firm.
When it comes to individual attribution, practitioners often
add a string of successes to their bios. For presentation to lim-
ited partners (LPs), individual performance of practitioners is
typically presented with one-page case studies of each portfolio
company. Investors should not only resist the urge to cherry-
pick the best opportunities but be prepared to share details of all
the investments. “Cherry-picking can hurt your credibility: we
live in a world where we are a few degrees away from ascer-
taining the facts,” says Christopher Rizik, fund manager at
Renaissance Venture Capital Fund, a fund of funds. For inves-
tors, it is not just a listing of opportunities that matters, but the
general partner’s (GP’s) role in value creation.
Attribution challenges can also cause internal competition
within a firm and destroy its chemistry. In a business where
hero worship trounces teamwork, it is easy to see why a part-
ner would want to be on the board of a fast-rising portfolio
company. In one firm, a newer partner, seeking instant attribu-
tion nirvana, assigned himself to the board of a rapidly grow-
ing portfolio company, edging the younger partner out. The
younger partner eventually left the firm and took his skills else-
where. The opportunity that was once rising cratered, scarring
the senior partner’s track record. “Attribution ambiguity can
be sorted out quickly; in most cases, the person who sourced
the opportunity and nurtured it is the CEO’s primary touch
point. We talk to the CEOs of portfolio companies to verify
the fund managers’ claims. In these discussions, the CEOs also
help us understand who a true value creator was versus who
showed up for the Christmas parties,” says Van Heel.
Exhibit 14.1 depicts another sample format, a summary
table that constitutes the list of portfolio companies managed
by each professional.

-- 168 of 546 --

INDIVIDUAL PERFORMANCE AND ATTRIBUTION 	139
Exhibit 14.1 Sample Format: Individual Performance.
Company
Amount of
Investment 	Current Value
Total Value
to Paid
In Capital
Internal
Rate of
Return (IRR)
Multiple
of Invested
Capital (MOIC)
Realized 	Unrealized
Company A 	$18.6 	$60.0 	— 	$60 	38.1% 	3.2
Company B 	$8.20 	$1.0 	$3.1 	$4.1 	0.5
The Alphabet Soup of Performance: IRR, C-on-C, TVPI,
DPI, or PME?
An informal survey conducted by McKinsey found that
only 20 percent of executives understand the critical
deficiencies of IRR. 1 IRR has its allure, offering what seems
to be a straightforward comparison of, say, 30 percent
returns with 8 percent. IRRs appear favorable but do not
consider reinvestment risks and the redeployment of
capital in other investment opportunities in the calculation
for investors.
Because IRR is expressed as a percentage, a small
investment can show a triple-digit IRR. While this looks
attractive at first glance, a larger investment with a lower
IRR can be more attractive on a net present value (NPV)
basis. To interpret IRR as an annual equivalent return on a
given investment is easy and intuitive, but this is only true
if there are no interim cash flows. This may be the case with
most venture investments, but in any biotech or a pharma
exit, where earnouts are negotiated, the IRR may become
misleading quickly.
LPs often gauge fund performance by analyzing a combi-
nation of IRRs (dollar-weighted returns, which are influenced
by the timing and magnitude of cash flows) and cash-on-
cash investment multiples, either total value to paid-in capi-
tal (TVPI) or distributions to paid-in capital (DPI). Each can
tell a different story and is important in its own right. But
none is sufficient by itself to tell the whole story.2

-- 169 of 546 --

140 	PERFORMANCE ANALysIs
LPs are watchful of poor performance as well. If a partner’s
performance is uninspiring, LPs candidly share their concerns
with the stronger partners and even establish preconditions
for investments. This leads to elimination of weaker partners
much in advance of the LP commitments.
In one example, a new fund was set up by a number of
practitioners who had worked at other brand-name firms.
But when potential LPs really dug in and got off-the-record
evaluation, the luster faded. In fact, these individuals had been
pushed out of their firms. “These GPs were not the stars they
made themselves out to be,” remarked Clint Harris of Grove
Street Advisors, a fund of funds.3 Despite this, a number of LPs
had quickly lined up at the new fund’s doors, eager to throw
money at these underperformers.
PUBLIC MARKET EQUIVALENTs
While IRR and C-on-C are primary measures, public market
equivalent (PME) measures a venture capital fund performance
against an investment in S&P 500, an index of public market
performance. If PME of a VC fund is greater than 1, then the
investors did better than investing in publicly traded stocks.
Professor Steven Kaplan of University of Chicago Booth
School of Business studied the various venture capital data
sources and cross-checked investment histories for nearly
1,400 funds derived from the holdings of over 200 institutional
Exhibit 14.2 Do VC Funds Outperform Public Markets?
Vintage Years
No. of Funds
in Dataset
Capital
Realized (%) 	IRR*
Multiple
of Capital 	PME
Average of all 	775 	85.8 	19.3 	2.46 	1.45
2000s 	423 	33.0 	0.3 	1.07 	0.95
1990s 	251 	97.8 	38.6 	3.76 	2.12
1980s 	101 	100.0 	15.8 	2.37 	1.08
Source: Robert S. Harris, Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan, “Private Equity Performance: What Do We Know?” Journal of
Finance (July 2013)
* IRR presented is weighted average (capital committed for each fund as a proportion of the total commitments for each vin-
tage year).

-- 170 of 546 --

FUND-LEVEL PERFORMANCE 	141
investors.4 Exhibit 14.2 presents some of the findings. VC out-
performed S&P 500 public markets index on an average across
the three decades, and did so handily in the 1990s, while in the
1980s was a whisper better.
FUND-LEVEL PERFORMANCE
LPs assess investment track records rigorously at the fund
level as well as the contribution of each investment profes-
sional. Fund performance is measured using two primary met-
rics: internal rate of return (IRR) and cash-on-cash (C-on-C)
multiples. While Exhibit 14.3 shows fund-level performance
in a stand-alone format, LPs typically assess stand-alone and
benchmarked comparisons, but it is the LP who prefers to
choose the benchmark. (See Exhibit 14.4, early-stage funds
with a US regional focus.)
LPs slice performance data in a number of ways, but it
all begins with the returns. “Instead of giving us the aggre-
gate performance numbers, it would be a lot easier if GPs
gave us the cash flows for each portfolio company,” says an
institutional LP, who has managed over 75 GP relationships.
LPs often grumble about the fact that data are not shared
to the level of their satisfaction. The Institutional Limited
Partners Association (ILPA) has developed reporting guide-
lines and templates for fund performance that address these
challenges. 5
Public versus Private: Why PME Matters
PME is the simplest and the most effective measure of ven-
ture capital performance. Consider an example where an
investor deploys $100 million in a venture fund and receives
$200 million. In comparison, if $100 million were invested in
S&P 500 during the same period, the investor would have
received $207 million. Thus, gross PME = $200/$207 = 0.97,
and net PME = $180/$207 = 0.97. In this case, the investor
lost money by investing in this venture capital fund.

-- 171 of 546 --

142 	PERFORMANCE ANALysIs
Exhibit 14.5 shows sample analysis tables of a venture firm
that has raised three funds. The data is analyzed by the fund,
by partner, by stage, investment size, MOIC range, sector, and
investment year. All of this helps an LP to get to the root cause
of performance. As a GP, you should be prepared to offer this
level of data to help LPs analyze performance quickly.
Investors assess general performance metrics as well as
specific data points. These data points are sliced in a number
of different ways to understand the risk and GP’s ability to
adhere to the stated strategy:
• 	Sourcing. Did the opportunity originate through your
proactive efforts? Or through a proprietary set of
Exhibit 14.3 Sample Fund Performance: Stand-Alone Format.
Company
Realized
investments
Date
of
Investment
Date
of
Realization
Total
Capital
Invested
($M)
Total
Realized
Proceeds
(A) ($M)
Unrealized
Value
(B)
($M)
Total
Value =
A + B
($M)
Multiple
of
Invested
Capital (×)
Gross
IRR
(%)
Company A 	Dec 08 	Nov 09 	$18.6 	$60.0 	— 	$60 	3.2 	38.1%
Company B 	Jan 09 	Jun 10 	$8.20 	$1.0 	$3.1 	$4.1 	0.5 	--
Total 	$26.8 	$61.0 	$3.1 	$64.1 	2.39 	24.2%
Unrealized
investments
Company C 	Mar 09 	-- 	$5.0 	$9.0 	$9.0 	1.8 	9.2%
Company D 	Jun 09 	-- 	$8.20 	$4.1 	$4.1 	0.5 	--
Total 	$13.2 	$13.1 	$13.1 	0.99 	--
Total fund
investments
$40.0 	$60.0 	$17.1 	$77.1 	1.92 	24.2%
Exhibit 14.4 Sample Fund Performance: Benchmarked Format.
Fund 	Vintage
Fund
Size
($M)
Called
(%)
Realized
(%)
Value
Unrealized
Value
(%)
Multiple
(X)
Net
IRR
(%)
Benchmark
IRR
(%) 	Quartile
ABC Fund VI 2015 	9 100.0% 	748.0 	0.0 	7.48 	47.7% 	25.3% 	1
ABC Fund VII 2018 	75 	94.6% 	1.2 	95.6 	0.97 	−1.2% 	−4.6% 	2
ABC Fund VIII 2020 	150 	36.5% 	0.0 	378.5 	3.78 	182.0% 	−10.9% 	1

-- 172 of 546 --

FUND-LEVEL PERFORMANCE 	143

-- 173 of 546 --

144 	PERFORMANCE ANALysIs

-- 174 of 546 --

FUND-LEVEL PERFORMANCE 	145

-- 175 of 546 --

146 	PERFORMANCE ANALysIs

-- 176 of 546 --

FUND-LEVEL PERFORMANCE 	147
relationships? How well did the opportunity fit within
the core investment criteria of the fund?
• 	Investment analysis. For established funds, LPs look
into returns and analyze these by fund, year, industry
subsectors, stage of investment, lead/co-lead roles,
and board representation. “At times, a fund’s track
record may be due to a ‘one-off’ event — we seek
consistent performance over economic cycles,” says
Van Heel. A one-off event, also called a one-hit home
run, occurs when one portfolio company generates the
majority of the returns for the entire portfolio. “This
business is about home runs indeed, but we aim to
dissect the overall approach and strategy of the fund.
At times, we remove the outliers from the venture
fund portfolio and stress test it to see how the rest of
the portfolio stacks up. And during the frothy times,
we even take it one step further — we set aside the top
two and bottom two outliers to see how resilient the
returns are.” Chopping off each end of the spectrum
allows a rigorous investor to review the portfolio in
a more balanced light. Several LPs agreed that this
approach is used to stress test the returns. Others do
not necessarily subscribe to this approach. “You are
investing in VC for their best-performing companies:
the returns come from the top decile, whether it is in a
fund, firm, or the industry. There is no consistency of
return,” says Perkins of Fisher Lynch Capital. Some LPs
also seek to assess the loss ratio: the amount lost vis-à-
vis the size of the fund. This ratio is a factor of sector
and stage: For example, an early-stage technology
fund would have a loss ratio of as much as 50 percent.
A later-stage health care fund would be looking at a
lower loss ratio. “Anything above 20 percent would
make me nervous,” says an institutional investor
who invested in a venture fund with a loss ratio of
3 percent.

-- 177 of 546 --

148 	PERFORMANCE ANALysIs
Investors seek all these data points to predict a GP’s abil-
ity to deliver consistent returns. “We use a number of data
points — we start with our own internal notes, look at fund
quarterly reports, web research, conferences, and portfolio
company meetings — it is multidimensional. This assessment
improves our ability to predict a firm’s potential to earn the
desired return,” says Lisa Edgar.
One simple method of showing performance that includes
public benchmarks could be as seen in Exhibit 14.6.
Predicting future performance is a harder challenge for any
investor, but GPs need to be prepared to address what will
make them successful in the current times. “If you don’t have
credible answers on how you plan to consistently generate
returns, don’t even bother knocking on any doors,” says Gus
Long of Stanwich Advisors.
MEAsURING REALIZED RETURNs
In the world of VC, the savvy never count their chickens until
they are hatched. Or calculate returns until you have moolah
in the coolah. But some count those unhatched eggs. And
then go a step further — they rank chicken farmers based
on their “unhatched” chickens. The conundrum of measur-
ing VC returns can get inane if you start to go down that
path. Measuring realized returns is the only way to avoid
this madness.
Let’s look at unrealized value in Exhibit 14.7. As much
as 68–86 percent of the fund value is still on paper. This can
change the final outcomes by orders of magnitude. If residual
Exhibit 14.6 Sample Fund Performance: Benchmarked Format.
Vintage Year 	Fund IRR
S&P 500
Return (%) 	PME vs S&P 500 	Russell 2000 (%)
PME vs.
Russell 2000
2010 	17.5% 	12.85% 	1.16 	11.68% 	1.25

-- 178 of 546 --

MEAsURING REALIZED RETURNs 	149
value is high, we should not count these chickens yet. Nor
should we declare winners. Distributions occur after as much
as 10+ years from launch. VC industry data must be measured/
compared once the funds are fully liquidated. Then and only
then can we know for sure who leads the pack. So why do we
even measure data/returns when we know the game has just
begun? Counting chickens before they are hatched is silly. But
starting to compare my unhatched chickens with yours and
then declaring winners is even sillier.
While selecting benchmarks, a number of self-selection
caveats crop up:
• 	Vintage year. A fund manager may be tempted to assign
a vintage year when she started raising the fund as com-
pared to when the final close occurred, or even when
they made their first investment.
• 	Universe of benchmarks. The data source matters, as does
the selection of benchmarks. Several data providers,
including Cambridge Associates, Pitchbook, and Preqin,
gather returns data. The universe of benchmarks can get
equally large. Clever fund managers could play around
and find a category in which they look like heroes. You
could position your fund as a shining star in the uni-
verse of venture funds. If that doesn’t look too good, you
could look at early-stage venture funds. Or you could
try to slice it by early-stage technology venture funds.
Exhibit 14.7 Measuring What Matters.
Vintage 	Fund Size
Distributed
Value
Unrealized/
Residual Value
Unrealized
Value
as % of
Total Value
Multiple
of Invested
Capital
Internal
Rate of Return
2009 	$ 300m 	$ 472m 	$301m 	38% 	2.6X 	42%
2010 	$ 650m 	$439m 	$965m 	68% 	2.3X 	25%
2012 	$ 1,500m 	$329m 	$2184m 	86% 	1.7X 	27%

-- 179 of 546 --

150 	PERFORMANCE ANALysIs
• 	Realized versus unrealized value. The data can become
muddier as you try to compare apples and oranges.
Unrealized returns often translate to risk: value of shares
held in any private companies often swing wildly.
• 	Veracity of data/self-reporting. As this industry calls for
self-reporting, the skeptical LPs pointed out that on an
industry-wide basis, the bad managers and the best
managers never report their data — only the mediocre
ones do. Diana Frazier of FLAG Capital management, a
fund of funds, says, “The best managers do not bother
submitting their data to any databases.” Thus, this
creates another layer of complexity in trying to assess
true performance of the vintage year. “We never used
any public database due to the veracity issues. We had
built our own internal assessment tools, which would
give us some very powerful insights. I believe most
LPs have similar internal tools,” one LP pointed out,
whose firm receives at least 200 PPMs each year. His
analysts would key in data from all investments from
these 200 firms, building a substantial database, which
could be sliced and analyzed in a number of differ-
ent ways. Rizik suggests intellectual honesty: “Make
it simple: show me every investment you have made,
along with the cash flows. If we smell any issues, it
becomes a nonstarter. GPs should be forthcoming on
the history.”
sELF-sELECTION BIAs: GIANTs AMONG MIDGETs
Exhibits 14.8 and 14.9 demonstrate the variance between the
top and the bottom ends of the spectrum between two separate
data sources. A clever fund manager would use a data source
to auto-magically show that they are the tallest among the
herd. To position themselves in the top quartile, 77 percent of firms
were found to change key data inputs such as the selection of the
reference benchmark and the definition of the fund’s vintage year. 6

-- 180 of 546 --

sELF-sELECTION BIAs: GIANTs AMONG MIDGETs 	151
In this vein, one LP sardonically pointed out, “Sure — any
fund can be in the top quartile when you self-select the bench-
mark and compare with funds that have all exits that occurred
on a Monday in the month of October when the full moon was
shining at its brightest.”
With stellar returns, it is no wonder that VC is an extremely
attractive investment — and that investors are looking for the
crème de la crème of the universe to maximize returns. David
Swensen of Yale University writes, “Selecting top-quartile man-
agers in private markets leads to much greater reward. . . . The
first quartile venture capitalist surpasses the median by 30.1
percent per annum, providing a much greater contribution to
portfolio results.”7
Exhibit 14.8 The Best versus the Worst: IRR Performance Variance
in Venture Funds.
Vintage Year 	Best Performer 	Median IRR 	Worst Performer
1980 	50.6 % 	16.6 % 	5.5 %
1985 	40.7 % 	13 % 	4 %
1990 	74.4 % 	19 % 	−35.9 %
1995 	447.4 % 	26.3 % 	−10.6 %
2000 	52.9 % 	−1.6 % 	−40 %
2005 	104.9 % 	4.1 % 	−55.5 %
2010 	51.6 % 	12.8 % 	−9.8 %
2015 	89.5 % 	13.2 % 	−3 %
Source: Adapted from Preqin Global Alternative Report 2018.
Exhibit 14.9 IRR Performance Variance in Venture Funds.
Vintage Year 	Top Decile 	Top Quartile 	Median IRR 	Bottom Quartile 	Bottom Decile
2000 	5.42% 	2.29% 	−1.50% 	−6.24% 	−15.20%
2005 	15.65% 	9.72% 	4.40% 	1.99% 	−8.20%
2010 	38.58% 	27.20% 	13.23% 	4.08% 	0.85%
2015 	41.02% 	22.94% 	14.49% 	9.25% 	4.06%
Source: Adapted from Pitchbook Data, Dec 2018.

-- 181 of 546 --

152 	PERFORMANCE ANALysIs
But the criteria for establishing performance benchmarks
are riddled with inconsistencies and ambiguity, with meas-
urements to identify top-quartile private capital funds vary-
ing widely. While public equity fund managers can look to
indexes such as the S&P 500, private fund managers do not
have the luxury of straightforward benchmarks. LPs point out
that top quartile can mean different things to different people.
Is it net IRR of 25 percent for its latest fund? Or is your “MOIC
multiple” in the top quartile? Funds with very attractive rates
of return may have inferior multiples, or have no cash distri-
butions. A venture firm may have a range of strong perform-
ing funds and one poor fund that, if excluded, can boost the
other funds and bring it into the coveted top quartile position.
In fact, omission of certain investments from the historical track
record to boost performance indicators is a common tactic practiced
among funds. 8
With the imperfect state of performance benchmarking
in the VC industry, investors cannot always make accurate
investment decisions. Assessing performance is as much an art
as it is a science.
When the top performers have no motivation to share their
performance data, and those at the bottom of the pile hide the
data to avoid any further embarrassment, what we have left
are data from a pile of mid-level players. Any LP struggles
with this conundrum — you could end up with “tallest among
the very small.” You can sense the challenges in the following
excerpt from a fund of funds newsletter:
A serious problem in establishing benchmarks is the sourcing and
aggregation of financial data because of the lack of transparency
and publicly disclosed information from private companies. What-
ever the source, significant biases adversely affect frank attempts to
benchmark the data. Sources dependent on accessibility and selec-
tive contributions lead to nonrepresentative sampling of the uni-
verse of funds.

-- 182 of 546 --

sELF-sELECTION BIAs: GIANTs AMONG MIDGETs 	153
Finally, incentives to report are also misleading.
Consider the choices top-performing managers have. There
is no incentive to contribute fund data to the index, which only
serves to raise the benchmark and makes the performance of
the fund look less stellar compared to its peers. On the other
hand, poorly performing fund managers also have no incen-
tive to disclose data to a third party because they are highly
unlikely to raise another fund. As one LP remarked, “Two
poorly performing funds, and you are out of the game.”
Existing barometers for investors are therefore the best of
what’s available, but they should be approached with a grain
of salt. Performance evaluation is still important; the key is to be
cautious on selection of benchmarks, especially if self-selected by
GPs. LPs dig deeper into manager track records, identify quan-
titative and qualitative indicators of performance on an abso-
lute and relative level, and monitor the fund diligently beyond
static indicators, such as the seemingly inviolable top-quartile
benchmark.9
When a multibillion-dollar French institutional investor, a
financial powerhouse of sorts, came to Silicon Valley eagerly
seeking relationships with a top quartile fund, they did not
get much love: “After a number of calls, one of the top-tier
Sand Hill Road venture funds agreed to meet with us. All they
would share is a statement of net returns. No details of portfo-
lio companies or the amount invested, nor gross returns. Nor
would we get any additional materials for due diligence. This
fund was obviously trying to be efficient on the due diligence
process as well as hiding the fee income. Their take-it-or-leave-
it attitude was indicative of the demand-supply situation.” 10
The French investor passed on the opportunity to invest in this
top quartile fund. Transparency, authenticity, and how you
engage in a potentially long-term relationships matter to LPs.
As practitioners, it is our duty to start these relationships with
intellectual honesty.

-- 183 of 546 --



-- 184 of 546 --

15
155
Terms of Fund
Investment
The Limited Partnership Agreement
A typical fund-offering document, called the private place-
ment memorandum (PPM), includes the fund’s investment
strategy, the fund manager’s background and expertise, and
market opportunity. The fund’s limited partnership agreement
(LPA) is the document that contains legal terms that describe
the fund control mechanics, management, investment, and
distribution of returns.
“Terms are important but seldom the primary drivers of
investment decisions. As they say, terms never make a poor
firm look good nor make a good firm unattractive,” says Kelly
Williams, managing director and head, Customized Fund
Investment Group, Credit Suisse Fund of Funds.
KEY TERMS
A short summary of key terms is usually included in the fund
documents and is presented here in Exhibit 15.1.
The highly negotiated terms between any investors and
fund managers are defined in Exhibit 15.2.
The various financial and governance terms in a fund are
structured to meet the goals of both investors and fund manag-
ers, as shown in Exhibit 15.3.

-- 185 of 546 --

156 	TERMS of fund InvESTMEnT
Exhibit 15.1 Key Fund Terms.
Fund size 	$100 million
Commitments 	Institutions: $5 million minimum
Individuals: $1 million.
Investment size 	Approximately $1,000,000 to $2,500,000 per initial investment. Maximum
investment per company capped at 10% of the fund or $10,000,000.
Fees 	2.5% reducing by 0.5% each year after year 5
Industry focus 	Technology (enterprise, consumer, security) and digital health
Investment stage 	Seed-stage companies with committed management teams and proven
commercial viability.
Geographic focus 	Silicon Valley, primarily
Term 	10 years. The fund will invest aggressively in the first 3–4 years and seek to
realize returns on its portfolio investments in 6–8 years.
Investment structures 	Priced equity rounds, capped convertible notes with warrants/discounts.
Investment term 	Anticipated year 1 to year 4. Due to the stage of investments, the holding
period may be up to 5–7 years or longer.
Portfolio construction
and governance
Target portfolio will include a mix of startups with high-risk profiles (30%),
medium-risk profiles (40%), and lower-risk profiles (30%). Governance and
management of portfolio will be via board seats and active engagement
with founders.
Exhibit 15.2 Most Negotiated Terms in a Fund.
Term 	Definition
Carry 	The percentage of profits, or “carried interests,” shared by the investors and the fund
managers. Typical carried interests are split 80% to the investors and 20% to the
fund managers.
Management
fees
The annual fees paid by investors to fund managers for operating expenses of the
fund. Typical fees are 2.5% per annum of committed capital, paid quarterly.
Waterfall 	The process and flow of sharing the returns.
Clawback 	The process of recovering excessive profits, if any, from fund managers at the end of
the fund life.
Key person 	Key persons, or the investment team of the fund managers, are identified. Should
these key people leave the fund or are unable to conduct their duties, the
investors trigger the right to take action, including stop-making investments.
Indemnification 	The fund investors indemnify the fund managers if they lose their capital.
Side letters 	Some institutional investors such as pension funds often ask for additional rights
via side letters. Because these agreements are drafted on a case-by-case basis,
these are called “side letters,” as these are aside of the limited partnership
agreement (LPA).

-- 186 of 546 --

fund fInAnCIAL TERMS 	157
fund fInAnCIAL TERMS
All investors seek a balance of financial and control provisions
in the fund terms. With respect to financial terms, typical nego-
tiation elements include the following.
Management fees
• 	Percentage. Management fees are typically 2.0–2.5 per-
cent per annum of committed capital.
• 	Duration. Fees ratchet down each year after the invest-
ment period, which is typically five years. Fund manag-
ers should establish a minimum floor to make sure there
are adequate fees to support the portfolio management,
accounting, and tax matters toward the end of the life
of the fund.
• 	Fees from multiple funds. Investors insist that fees be
reduced when a successor fund is formed. The fees are
also typically reduced if the fund managers receive any
compensation or fees from portfolio companies. If the
Exhibit 15.3 Financial and Governance Terms.
Terms 	Goals
Fund size, term, management fees, minimum
contributions, and GP commitment
Describes the basic financial transactions
between LP and GP
Drawdowns, reinvestments, investment limitations,
defaults, co-investments
Describes the flow of investment capital between
fund and portfolio companies
GP investment committee 	Determines how investments are made
Allocation of profits and losses, distributions,
GP clawback
Describes the flow of returns from the GP
back to the LP
Key person event, investment period termination
or suspension, no-fault divorce or GP removal,
for-cause termination or GP removal, transfer
of LP interests and withdrawal, reports, parallel
funds and successor funds, audit, LPAC
Describes the management and governance
of the fund
Liability of LPs, indemnification, employee benefit plan
regulations, public disclosure issues, tax-exempt
investors, non-US investors
Other legal, taxation, and regulatory matters are
defined in these terms

-- 187 of 546 --

158 	TERMS of fund InvESTMEnT
fund managers manage an existing fund, investors often
assess the existing fund’s investment period, commit-
ments, fees, and impact on the proposed fund’s fees. It is
typical for fund managers to raise a new fund when an
existing fund is about 70 percent invested.
As shown in Exhibit 15.4, the amount of investable capital
varies over the life of the fund as the structure and timing of
fees vary.
Seth Levine, managing director of the Foundry Group, a
leading technology fund based in Colorado, says, “Good GPs
[general partners] think of management fee as a loan against
carried interest. Carry is paid on the full fund value, not net of
fees. Any fees you take out are effectively loans against future
performance.” 1
financial Commitment of the General Partners
The industry standard for GP commitment to the fund is at
the minimum 1 percent of the capital. Thus, for a $100 million
fund, the managers are expected to invest at least $1million.
This ensures that the GP has some skin in the game. However,
some managers are bold enough to take bigger bets, proving
that they can eat their own cooking by investing as much as 30
percent of the fund.
Exhibit 15.4 Fund Management Fee Vesting Scenarios.
Years
1–5 	Year 6 	Year 7 	Year 8 	Year 9 	Year 10
Total GP
Fees ($M)
Investable
Capital ($M)
Scenario 1 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 	2.5 	25.00 	75.00
Scenario 2 	2.5 	2.25 	1.75 	1.5 	1.25 	1 	20.25 	79.75
Scenario 3 	2.25 	1.8 	1.44 	1.15 	0.92 	0.73 	17.30 	82.70
Scenario 4 	2.5 	12.50 	87.50
In Scenario 1, the fees stay flat at 2.5% of the committed capital. This is unlikely — a GP dream scenario — but is presented for
illustration.
In Scenario 2, the fees drop by 10% after year 5, or the investment period.
In Scenario 3, the fees start at 2.25% and drop by 20 percent after year 5.
In Scenario 4, the fees drop to zero after year 5. This example is atypical and is extracted from a single LP fund.

-- 188 of 546 --

fund fInAnCIAL TERMS 	159
Carried Interests and Performance-Based Triggers
The industry standard for carried interest split is 80/20, where
the investors retain 80 percent of the profits and 20 percent
profits go to the fund managers. In Tier One funds, where
performance has been demonstrated over multiple funds and
economic cycles, carried interests can be as high as 30 percent.
However, this is rare, and most fund managers stay with the 20
percent structure. Often, emerging managers attempt to drop
the carry to 10 percent to lure investors. This seldom impacts
the ability to attract investors or hasten the capital raise pro-
cess. Most institutional investors ignore such overtures and
treat these as a deviation from the norm. At times, it is per-
ceived as a sign of weakness.
Venture capital funds typically do NOT offer a preferred
rate of return. This is a norm in private equity funds, where a
return rate of, say, 8 percent is established. Often called a hurdle
rate, this rate factors in the cost of capital over the time period.
More importantly, a cause of heartburn for LPs is the way
fund managers calculate carried interest to their advantage.
Take, for example, the calculation of carried interest. Carry
should be calculated on the basis of net profits, not gross prof-
its, according to the Institutional Limited Partners Association
(ILPA) best practices. Put differently, fund managers should
treat fees as a loan.
It’s Not Always About Your Fees
Some of our VC partners are willing to raise capital at less
than a market-clearing price. For example, they can get much
better fees and profits with newer LPs, like sovereign wealth
funds who are eager to get in the game at Sand Hill Road. But
for our VC partners, supporting our foundation is important.
Our foundation stands for certain values and plays an impor-
tant role in the social fabric — the work our VC partners do
helps impact our foundation but it has a much bigger impact
in the society.
— Anonymous, investment manager at $10 bn US foundation

-- 189 of 546 --

160 	TERMS of fund InvESTMEnT
Separately, in a survey of 50 institutional investors, the
largest issue for any LP is the calculation of carry: Is it calcu-
lated deal by deal or by fund level? Needless to say, LPs prefer
fund-level calculation of carry, which allows them to recover
their capital first before any carry split.
Several funds have developed a tiered carry structure. For
example, the 80/20 split is effective until the investors receive
three times the committed capital, over and above which the
structure changes to 70/30. Such performance-based triggers
are not an industry norm but are seen in hypercompetitive
regions such as Silicon Valley or smaller micro-venture cap-
ital funds.
Waterfall
The waterfall defines how capital will be distributed as exits
occur. The industry norm, as seen in the Exhibit 15.5, is to first
return the principal amount back to investors (also called
“100 percent catch-up”) before the fund managers share
any profits.
Example: Carry Calculation: Net Profits versus Gross
Profits
To illustrate the difference between net profits and gross
profits, consider the following table:
Net Profits ($M) 	Gross Profits ($M)
Profits 	$125 	$150
GP carried
interest at 20%
$25 	$30
GP fees + carry = 	$50 	$55
Assume fund returns are $150 million. The difference
between net profits and gross profits can be substantial. LPs
look at the gross profit calculations unfavorably, especially
for larger funds.

-- 190 of 546 --

fund fInAnCIAL TERMS 	161
Typically, distributions are made in the following amounts
and order of priority:
1. First, 100 percent to all partners in proportion to their
respective capital contributions until the partners have
received cumulative distributions equal to the sum of
their capital contributions.
2. Thereafter, the balance (a) 20 percent to the general
partner (the “carried interest distributions”) and (b) 80
percent to the limited partners in proportion to their
respective aggregate capital contributions.
Investors are supportive of distributing carried interest
to fund managers after the investors receive back their entire
committed capital. Certain fund managers allocate carry on a
deal-by-deal basis, and profits are distributed after each exit
occurs. This creates potential challenges for the future when
the final investments are liquidated. If, at a fund level, losses
are generated, clawbacks are triggered where the fund manag-
ers have to pay back amounts to investors.
Clawbacks
One of the heavily negotiated provisions, clawbacks, occurs
when returns need to be paid back by the fund managers to
the investors. When carry is distributed early in the life of a
fund only to be followed by later losses, clawbacks ensure that
investors get their 80 percent profits for the full portfolio at
Exhibit 15.5 Presenting Waterfall to Investors.
Partial Sale of (Company Name) 	Investor LP Pro Rata Share ($m)
Distributable cash 	200
Return of capital 	100
Pre LP/GP split [A] 	100
After LP/GP split [B] 	80
Carry paid/(received) [A−B] 	20

-- 191 of 546 --

162 	TERMS of fund InvESTMEnT
the end of the fund term. It is impossible to predict what the
overall portfolio returns and fund profits will be at the end of
the term. Overdistribution to fund managers is likely to occur
if the early successes are offset by later failures. Thus, an LP
can “claw back” the shortfall amounts from fund managers at
the final liquidation.
Fund managers must take great care to plan for claw-
back possibilities. “I have known of managers that have to
sell their houses due to clawbacks,” says Kelly DePonte of
Probitas Partners. “This is a Damoclean sword that hangs
over every GP’s head.” 2 LPs prefer that an escrow account
be established and combined with joint and several personal
guarantees from all fund managers/carry recipients. The
clawback conditions on taxes are obvious in that LPs shall
not seek to claw back the income taxes paid by the GP on the
carry earned.
Naturally, neither party looks forward to triggering this
clause, but it is a necessary clause for investor protection. An
escrow account is often a suitable middle ground, where a
portion of distributions are set aside for such situations. With
fund managers themselves, suitable agreements need to be
established. If clawback liability is joint and several among the
carry recipients, one partner can be liable for another partner’s
liabilities.
fund GovERnAnCE TERMS
Fund governance or control provisions are often governed
by a limited partner advisory committee (LPAC). It typically
includes three to five larger investors in the fund. A balanced
LPAC has representation of various constituents by size of
investment or type of constituent (pension funds, endow-
ments, HNWIs, etc.). In designing LPAC, the largest investors
in a fund would always look for the interests of the smallest
investor. At times, larger LPs insist that the GPs invite at least
one representative from the high-net-worth group to partici-
pate on the LPAC.

-- 192 of 546 --

fund GovERnAnCE TERMS 	163
Responsibilities of the LPAC include but are not limited to
the following sections.
Investment Limitations
Investors limit the fund manager’s ability by percentage of cap-
ital, geography, and type of security. For example, managers
cannot invest more than 10 or 15 percent of fund commitments
in a single company because it’s a prudent risk management
and mitigation strategy. Other constraints include geographic
(e.g., fund managers cannot invest in portfolio companies
domiciled outside of the United States or Canada) or types
of securities. Fund managers cannot invest in publicly traded
securities.
In several investor interviews, strategy drift was brought
up as a minor irritant. Strategy drift occurs when GPs claim to
make investments in a certain sector and stage but later shift
away from the agreed-upon strategy. Though most agreements
allow for up to 10 percent of capital to be invested in such
“opportunistic” investments, investors start to feel uncomfort-
able when a larger amount of capital starts to move into other
categories. When any market forces cause shifts in strategy,
fund managers are better suited in seeking LPAC approvals.
When the cleantech sector started to go out of favor and yet
funds were bound by the agreements, fund managers started
to push the envelope on investments. One institutional inves-
tor remarked, “You will be amazed what was being passed off
to us as a cleantech opportunity.” Another said, “When the best
returns for a GP come from the ‘other’ investment categories
and not the primary investment thesis, it makes us wonder.”
Conflicts of Interest
Can fund III make an investment in a fund II portfolio com-
pany? Under what circumstances will the investment be
referred to LPAC for approval? Fund managers often find
themselves in situations that may be perceived as self-serving.
Some managers may have other sources of income, and may

-- 193 of 546 --

164 	TERMS of fund InvESTMEnT
make personal investments in select portfolio companies or in
companies outside of the fund. Such potential acts of conflict
need to be approved or disclosed.
“Key Person” Provisions
If there are any changes in the core investment team personnel,
the investors have the right to suspend the fund’s investments
or terminate the fund. The fund managers, on the other hand,
have an interest in continuing the entity and investment activi-
ties. The following list some negotiation elements:
• 	Who are the key persons? What subset of partners is con-
sidered more important to execute the strategy? Are
the LPs in agreement with the selection? It is critical for
investors to identify the key persons and have adequate
remedies if they are no longer managing the fund.
• 	What is defined as the trigger for such a clause? Death, dis-
ability, and failure to devote appropriate time are often
standard trigger conditions. LPs prefer the suspension
of investments to be automatic after a triggering event,
unless a plan is approved by the LPAC to move forward
with alternate personnel.
no-fault divorce
Investors can terminate the relationships with the fund without
any particular reason or “fault” on either side. This certainly
tilts the axis of power. Depending on the terms of the partner-
ship agreement, the fund can thus be dissolved, the investment
period can be stalled, and/or the GP can be replaced. While
LPs seldom trigger this clause, it creeps up when issues such
as GP misconduct or breach may have occurred. Tax/regula-
tory matters, felonies, bankruptcies, negligence, and breach of
agreements by GPs can trigger this clause. “In my experience,
a 75 percent to 80 percent LP vote is typical for a no-fault ter-
mination of the fund,” says Howard Beber, a fund attorney at
the law firm of Proskauer Rose.

-- 194 of 546 --

fund GovERnAnCE TERMS 	165
Indemnification/Standard of Care
This clause eliminates any liabilities for the fund manager for
any act or omissions and prevents lawsuits. Exceptions include
fraud, good faith, gross negligence, or willful malfeasance.
Confidentiality
Certain investors, such as state pension funds and university
endowments, are subject to the US Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA) guidelines. FOIA is an information disclosure statute that
encourages accountability through transparency. Though FOIA
laws vary from state to state, generally, in the venture capital
context, certain information reported by a GP to a public plan
limited partner can be the subject of an FOIA request. A news-
paper reporter could submit an FOIA request to a public plan
limited partner and subsequently publish sensitive fund or port-
folio company information. To date, many states have modified
their laws to protect portfolio company information from public
disclosure. GPs also seek to limit details of fund investments in
portfolio companies from becoming public, as they could impact
future financing and valuations. A variety of remedies exist,
including limiting information to such LPs or, in extreme cases,
barring such LPs from future participation in funds.
Other terms include the following:
• 	Valuation matters. LPAC adopts guidelines and weighs
in on markups or markdowns of portfolio company
valuation.
• 	Side letters. All LPs are equal, but some LPs are more
equal than others. Side letters provide additional clarity
or describe the specific agreement (above and beyond
the standard terms) between the GP and the LP. LPs
know that side letters are a common theme in the busi-
ness. To avoid debates regarding the GP fee calculations,
one LP proposed an elegant side letter asking, “The
auditors have reviewed and ascertained that the GP fees
have been calculated correctly.”

-- 195 of 546 --

166 	TERMS of fund InvESTMEnT
• 	Coinvestments. LPs may negotiate coinvestment rights
to have the ability to cherry-pick investment opportu-
nities and invest more capital in promising companies.
In doing so, LPs also gain insights into how the GP
chooses the opportunities, structures investments, and
adds value as a board member. The process and tim-
ing of responses need to be managed effectively by the
GP: It is likely that the LP may not have the ability to
conduct due diligence, invest in follow-on rounds, or
respond within the allocated time frame. However, if an
LP can bring some strategic insights to the company, it is
often worth the time and effort for both parties. GPs also
need to be cautious in that such an investment from an
LP, especially a corporate LP with industry knowledge,
does not scare off acquirers and impair the exit potential
and value.
WHAT InSTITuTIonAL LPs SEEK
The Institutional Limited Partners Association (ILPA) represents
240 organizations that collectively manage over $1 trillion of pri-
vate equity capital. ILPA has developed best practices for fund
managers that focus on alignment of interest, governance, and
transparency:3
• 	Alignment of interest. The GPs should focus on profit
maximization and not merely management fees.
• 	Governance. The fund managers should put controls and
adequate checks and balances in place so that investors’
interests are primary at all times.
• 	Transparency. The fund managers should share financial
performance, fee income, and returns calculations.
These practices are governed by the terms shown in
Exhibit 15.6.

-- 196 of 546 --

WHAT InSTITuTIonAL LPs SEEK 	167
As the managing director of private equity for the Univer-
sity of California Regents, Timothy Recker manages a portfo-
lio of venture capital and private equity funds. As the former
chair of the ILPA, he worked on a number of issues to ensure
that the interests of the two sides are aligned. “The ILPA has
diligently worked to address a number of issues that make the
EXHIBIT 15.6 Industry Best Practices: GP–LP Terms Summary.
Driver 	Terms
Alignment of interests between LP investors and GP fund managers:
Does the GP have skin in the game? 	Is the GP commitment significantly above or below
industry standards? What is the GP’s commitment
with respect to his or her net worth?
Are the management fees structured
appropriately?
Do the management fees adjust when successor funds
are raised? How are the fees adjusted after the
investment period?
Are there opportunities where a GP–LP conflict
of interest may arise?
Can the GP coinvest its personal capital in select cherry-
picked opportunities? Will this create a fundamental
conflict in the portfolio? As one LP asks, “Why should
a manager have side bets and other businesses?”
Is the GP–LP profit sharing structure designed
appropriately?
Waterfall distribution and clawback provisions
Are all the GP management team members
motivated to succeed?
Compensation, GP distribution of carry within its team,
resources to operate the fund
What is the investment strategy? 	Investment limitations by company, sector, pace of
drawdowns, reinvestments, investments from multiple
funds in same opportunity
Governance and controls of the fund and its management
Does an LP advisory committee (LPAC) exist?
What are the roles and responsibilities
of such a committee? Do the LPs receive
adequate information from GPs?
LP advisory committee (LPAC) size, responsibilities, and
frequency of meetings; reports, annual meetings,
valuation guidelines
Standard of care: does the GP allocate
substantial time and attention to building
and managing the portfolio?
Is the fund a GP’s primary activity? Does the GP have other
income streams, investments, or interests?
Do the LPs have options to limit the downside or
exit the relationship?
No-fault divorce, key person event, key person insurance,
termination of investment period, transfer of LP
interests, and withdrawal
Transparency of financial information
Transparency of GP income streams,
portfolio quality
Fees and carried interest calculations, valuation, and
financial information, other relevant GP information,
and protection of proprietary information

-- 197 of 546 --

168 	TERMS of fund InvESTMEnT
GP–LP relationship stronger,” he says. 4 According to industry
surveys, as many as 58 percent of LPs choose not to invest in
funds that ignore the ILPA guidelines.
offERInG SWEETEnERS To ATTRACT LPs:
A douBLE-EdGEd SWoRd
Several GPs offer sweeteners to make the fund attractive
to potential LPs, and some even attempt to create a sense of
urgency. Liam, Founding Partner of .406 Ventures offers a
good example of a sweetener:
We pooled our own capital, invested in five companies and offered
to contribute this portfolio of five investments to the fund at cost.
LPs got a sense of opportunities we can attract and realized that
we were serious about getting in the business. We believed that
this is a small price to pay. We could demonstrate we understood
how to build a portfolio that aligns with our strategy. LPs know
that it is easy to write about strategy in an offering document, but
having actually “walked the talk” and done it as a first-time fund,
that level of thoughtfulness and sophistication allowed us to dem-
onstrate that we can walk the talk.5
When one of Liam’s portfolio companies, HealthDialog, a
health care analytics company, was sold for $775 million, the
LPs received 2X in less than seven months.
Examples of sweeteners that have not yielded positive
outcomes include offering portfolio companies from previous
funds that may not have made any meaningful progress. In
one example, fund III offered at least half a dozen companies
from fund II to LPs at cost. This can irritate existing fund II
LPs who have borne significant risk. Future fund III LPs may
also wonder how they might be treated when it comes time to
raise fund IV.

-- 198 of 546 --

MoST nEGoTIATEd LP–GP TERMS 	169
MoST nEGoTIATEd LP–GP TERMS
For GPs as well as LPs, the primary tension arises around the
overall economics — management fees and the management
of the fund. In a survey conducted by the Center for Private
Equity and Entrepreneurship at Dartmouth’s Tuck School of
Business, about 100 GPs and LPs were asked to rank the most
negotiated terms.6 As Exhibit 15.7 shows, key person provi-
sions, clawbacks, and management fees were among the top
negotiated terms.
Understanding key limited partner agreement (LPA) terms
and knowing what to negotiate can help a GP accelerate the
fundraising process. Investors seek to ensure the alignment of
interests. The fee carry, and other restrictive covenants, safe-
guard their investments and focus the GP toward long-term
profit creation. LPs may have remedies, such as key person
provisions, cause or no-fault fund terminations, or fund man-
ager removal provisions. These remedies are rarely exercised
yet provide a negotiating leverage and a safety cover.
Selecting an experienced fund attorney to develop an
appropriate negotiating plan is equally critical. “Choose your
service providers wisely — the wrong choice can damage
your prospects,” says Kelly Williams of Credit Suisse Fund
of Funds. “We have seen some very good first-time funds
Exhibit 15.7 Most Negotiated Terms in Order of Priority: LPs
and GPs Views.
LPs — Most Negotiated 	GPs — Most Negotiated
1. Key person 	1. Clawbacks
2. Waterfall 	2. Key person
3. Management fees 	3. Management fees
4. Clawbacks 	4. Carry
5. Side letters 	5. Side letters
6. Indemnification 	6. Waterfall
7. Carry 	7. Indemnification

-- 199 of 546 --

170 	TERMS of fund InvESTMEnT
but their legal counsel behaved poorly and it did not help
the cause.” 7 A good attorney knows the market trends of the
terms, understands the value of attracting an institutional
LP, and proceeds to guide the fund managers accordingly. In
one example, a $30-plus billion institutional investor com-
plained that a mature venture firm, now raising fund IV, had
picked a small-town attorney with very little experience in
negotiating LPAs. “We were utterly flummoxed,” says this
LP, “and wondered — were the GPs trying to save the fees?
I mean, this inexperienced attorney created much angst at
our end. They used improper terminology, did not know the
market standards . . . it reflected very poorly on the GPs. In
fact, nowadays, the first thing we look at in an LPA is the
name of their legal counsel. If this is an experienced firm,
well versed with private equity, it shows that the GP knows
what they are doing.” 8
And if needed, a placement agent can (for a generous fee)
introduce you to several investors. Often agents are invited to
help top-off a fund, which may have reached 70 percent of the
target raise. The role of placement agents is addressed in the
following chapter. Most industry veterans agree: LPs do not
invest in funds based on terms (but they may choose not to
invest if terms are too GP favorable). Rather, LPs make invest-
ment decisions based on the full package — team, strategy,
and past performance. As one investor remarked, “Show me
an established firm with consistent top quartile returns and I
will concede on most terms.”
WHY LPs TERMInATE EXISTInG RELATIonSHIPS
Catherine Crockett, founder of Grove Street Advisors, a fund
of funds with over $6 billion under management, says, “Ter-
minating a relationship is the hardest part.” Crockett and her
team screen over 500 fund managers and deploy $500 million
in any given year.

-- 200 of 546 --

WHY LPs TERMInATE EXISTInG RELATIonSHIPS 	171
The primary reasons for terminating a relationship are fund
performance, partners’ motivations and alignment, and fund size:
• 	Fund performance. When performance falters, the deci-
sion is easy. No re-ups; it is an easy good-bye.
• 	Partners’ motivations and alignment. As partners become
successful, they lose their motivation — bloated senior
partners with decreasing appetite should stay on the
couch, not feature prominently in the private place-
ment memorandum (PPM). They are not an asset in this
business. Ensuring that the rewards are shared with all
investment committee and junior members is important.
Finally, partners need to stay current with the market
and technology developments.
Source: Cartoon Collections.

-- 201 of 546 --

172 	TERMS of fund InvESTMEnT
• 	Fund size. Successful funds grow too big too fast. LPs
worry that with bloated funds, finding the right invest-
ment opportunities and generating returns will be
harder. Small is beautiful, indeed. While success breeds
success, and as more LPs try to kick down the doors, the
smarter LPs quietly exit through the side doors.
In a dynamic world, markets change, and the ability to gen-
erate returns changes. “If the three variables, investment team,
investment strategy, and the market environment, are static,
it is easy to make re-up decisions. But these are in a state of
perpetual flux,” says Lisa Edgar of Top Tier Capital Partners.
Fundraising is an extremely competitive exercise. Consider
the fact that more than 400 funds were seeking aggregate com-
mitments of $80 billion.9 Only about a third of the population
will be able to attract capital. Thus, any fund manager needs to
establish strong differentiators.
First-time funds have a limited probability of raising funds
with institutional investors, but they are looked on favorably
by some funds of funds. History shows that fund managers
who started small, raised capital from high-net-worth individ-
uals (HNWIs) and local foundations, and built a track record
were able to achieve liftoff. The LP courtship process is a long
and slow dance. As most LPs say, introductions are the best
way to start. The role of a placement agent can be critical. For
new managers, the typical timeline from the first touch to a
commitment is about 12 months or as long as three years.
A new fund is always scrutinized to the highest degree.
The amount of diligence is an order of magnitude higher: track
record, references, and such. Finally, success begets success.
Benchmark Fund I generated an envious 92X cash-on-cash
(C-on-C) multiple. The fundraising timelines for Benchmark
Fund II were probably much shorter as compared to the
first fund.

-- 202 of 546 --

16
173
The investment firm Goldman Sachs is considered to be one
of the best money-making machines on Wall Street. Yet it was
once described as “a great vampire squid wrapped around the
face of humanity, relentlessly jamming its blood funnel into any-
thing that smells like money.” Surely, for any investor, success
is measured by the returns you generate. And the more you
make, the better it is.
But what gives, along this path to riches? What keeps you
from turning into a soulless vampire squid? Defining your
ethos, and cementing it in your soul, is a foundational step in
building the venture firm.
Besides its ethos, values as well as a firm’s value proposition
can define its brand identity. Many firms believe that a fancy
website, smiling faces, and partner headshots with overstated
bios and some logos are sufficient. In an era when entrepre-
neurs have plenty of choices, the venture firms need to weigh
the importance of building and branding their venture firms in
a compelling fashion.
The archetype of a firm can take several forms — a tight-
knit small partnership (Benchmark and the Foundry Group),
a service agency (Andreessen Horowitz, with over 100 team
members), or a technology-led community platform (First
The Venture Firm’s
Ethos, Culture,
and Values

-- 203 of 546 --

174 	The VenTure Firm’s eThos, CulTure, and Values
Round Capital). Though each of these models have their own
nuances, let’s start with the ethos of the firm.
eThos
What defines the beliefs, values, and character traits of the firm
and its partners? How do they treat people — the founders,
their LPs, and their service providers? More importantly, how
do they interact with those from whom they cannot gain any-
thing? What role can a VC fulfill in society? Are they more than
just money-making machines? Pardon my Greek, but Aristotle
defined the three categories of ethos as:
1. phronesis — wisdom, good judgment, and excellence
of character
2. arete — excellence, moral virtues, living up to your
full potential
3. eunoia — benevolence, beautiful thinking, and goodwill
While some firms share their ethos publicly, others may
have internalized these. Sequoia Capital, a firm that has suc-
ceeded across 50 years of economic cycles and three genera-
tional transitions, defines its ethos in a succinct manner.
CulTure and Values
“Culture is like cement — it firms up quickly” reminds Rob
Ward, co-founder and partner at Meritech Capital. Rob is
known amongst entrepreneurs for his “little hat; lots of cattle”
approach — the inverse of the Texan slam, “All hat, no cattle,”
which implies lots of talk and no action. Meritech, like Bench-
mark, has earned respect among the elite founder circles in Sil-
icon Valley for its no-nonsense approach to investments. The
partners form a tight-knit team, do all the work themselves,

-- 204 of 546 --

CulTure and Values 	175
Defining Your Ethos: The Sequoia Way
Sequoia, 1972 and Beyond
The creative spirits. The underdogs. The resolute. The
determined. The outsiders. The defiant. The independent
thinkers. The fighters and the true believers.
These are the founders with whom we partner. They’re
extremely rare. And we’re ecstatic when we find them.
We partner early — sometimes when a company is no
more than an idea. We know these crucial first decisions can
have an exponential influence on the curve of success.
Our style is not for everyone. We push when we see
potential. We are direct. Some don’t like our approach. Most
who know us do.
Our team mirrors the founders with whom we partner:
hungry overachievers with a deep-rooted need to win. Many
come from humble backgrounds. Many are immigrants.
Many formed or built companies of their own before join-
ing Sequoia. Each shares the mindset of an entrepreneur, and
knows what it means to walk that path.
We value teamwork over showmanship. Our contribu-
tion to a company always comes from several of us working
together. We’re skittish about the first person singular, and
don’t care to see our names in the press.
Our team is small. We prefer a few people with diverse
strengths focused — some painfully — that are eternal truths.
Our network is strong. Our advantage comes from four dec-
ades of legendary founders helping each other.
Long ago, we made nonprofits the backbone of our limited
partner base. Working for these charities brings intense meaning
to what we do. It gives us a heightened sense of responsibility.
We’re serious about our work and carefully choose the
words to describe it. Terms like deal or exit are forbidden. And
while we’re sometimes called investors, that is not our frame
of mind. We consider ourselves partners for the long term.
We help the daring build legendary companies, from idea
to initial public offering (IPO) and beyond.

-- 205 of 546 --

176 	The VenTure Firm’s eThos, CulTure, and Values
Exhibit 16.1 Framework for Values.
Factor 	Values
Behavior and actions 	Optimists, risk takers, first movers, independent thinkers, honor the
founders’ journey, keep your commitments, be responsive, make
prompt decisions
Sharing rewards 	Did you act as a steward of your LP capital? Did the founders and syndicate
investors win? Was this a zero-sum game?
Addressing challenges 	Accept responsibility, practice empathy and compassion, fight for the common
and greater good
and are heavily engaged in the business. No junior partners
are slaved to write memos or diligence calls. Even the mun-
dane scheduling activity is managed by partners themselves.
“A shared success model has its merit — too much is based on
one person in our business, and that often causes challenges.
Our culture is built around selflessness — we build/share and
care,” says Rob.
Hard-nosed investors and left-brained analytical minds
find this whole culture and values discussion to be soft and
gooey. Dismissing this as unimportant, such investors often
dive into the money-making fun parts of the business. That
lackadaisical approach to the core tenets of business led to
behavior where investors who preyed on women founders,
colleagues, and peers. Sexual harassment was rife, especially
where men dominate the flow of capital and assume a power
stance with founders.
In his book Flow, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi describes a study
in which happy and productive professionals were compared
with unhappy and unproductive. The most important factor was
alignment with personal values. If you ask, “What are values?”
try to recall a tough situation in which stakes were high and
both options looked equally compelling. What tilted the scale
for you? Why did you move in one direction when both paths
looked the same?
Our values are a set of drivers that propel each of us in
different ways, to fulfill our deepest yearnings. Yet values can
deviate in circumstances — one person may make choices
that the rest may not agree upon. Exhibit 16.1 offers some
guidelines.

-- 206 of 546 --

CulTure and Values 	177
At Base10 Ventures, their values are quite simple — no
elaborate, fancy language nor confusing, generic platitudes.
• 	Serve the entrepreneur.
• 	Take the long view.
• 	Be humble.
• 	Serve our investors.
Core Values — New Schools Venture Fund
New Schools Venture Fund defines its core values, which
inform the work they do and how they do it.
We are:
Bold. We are optimists who find, fund, and support pas-
sionate entrepreneurs with powerful ideas. We take risks on
early-stage teams with plans that possess the greatest prom-
ise for transformative impact. Our efforts help to create a bet-
ter future for all students.
Passionate. We bring enthusiasm and humility to our
work, along with an unwavering commitment to deliver on
our mission. We love what we do and bring our best selves
to work every day.
Connected. We build trusting, collaborative, and honest
relationships with our partners and one another to accomplish
more together. By forging deep connections with our ventures
and other education leaders, along with the students and com-
munities they serve, we can deliver on our common goals.
Inclusive. We urgently confront present-day inequality
by investing in and amplifying the voices of diverse entre-
preneurs so that powerful ideas have a chance to flourish.
We nurture a respectful culture that leverages the strength of
varied talents and perspectives.
Accountable. We make decisions based on rigorous anal-
ysis and are conscientious stewards of the resources entrusted
to us. We actively measure our progress toward transform-
ing PK–12 education for all students. We take responsibility
for our actions and honor our commitments.

-- 207 of 546 --

178 	The VenTure Firm’s eThos, CulTure, and Values
Take the example of the following core values:
• 	Communication — We have an obligation to communicate.
• 	Respect — We treat others as we would like to be treated.
• 	Integrity — We work with customers and prospects openly,
honestly, and sincerely.
• 	Excellence — We are satisfied with nothing less than the very
best in everything we do.
This company was named “most innovative company
in America” by Fortune magazine for six years. It had over
25,000 employees and claimed $100 billion in revenues. Yet
the CEO landed in prison as the company was declared bank-
rupt. The highest echelons of the company were unable to put
these core values in practice. Any company could claim these
values as a part of their own ethos. But as this case of Enron
demonstrates, putting values to work, on a daily basis, is the
challenge. Writing it down is the easy part — such exercises
are often done by a coach, at a fun, off-site location, ideally by
the sea where team pictures at sunset are filled with smiles
and glee. And then reality hits, once everyone gets back in
the grind.
“Values are words — culture is how you actually live those
words. Articulating values, living these values day-in and
day-out and testing them, and then adapting these as needed
requires deliberate effort. At Enron, you had ‘respect.’ Sounds
good, right? But respect can be such a vague word, and it’s
hard to know if someone is being truly respectful,” says Jeff
Lawson, founder and CEO of Twilio.1 “At Twilio we have: Be
humble. It’s a more specific version of respect, and it’s action-
able. We all know what humble is, we all know what humble
is not. We have a pretty good sense for that.” But in a venture
firm, which is often a group of type A personalities and cow-
boys hunting, who will design and enforce the value system
becomes a fundamental challenge. As a company CEO, it may
be easier to put these in place, but harder in a venture firm. Yet
these values need to be monitored and put in practice. Lawson

-- 208 of 546 --

CulTure and Values 	179
says, “Leading a company means being a conscious custodian
of its values. It’s a requirement, not a nice-to-have. Because,
here’s the reality: Every company has a culture and has values,
whether or not you put them into words. You might as well articulate
them so that they stay in your sight, and you can guide them.”
diversity
Just 11 percent of American venture investors are women, an
appalling metric by any standard. Effectively, this is like shut-
ting out 50 percent of the population’s views and inputs, and
ignoring the market trends and opportunities that come with
this diversity. Does increased diversity lead to better firm per-
formances? In a research study, authors Paul Gompers and
Sophie Wang looked at a dataset of the gender of venture capi-
tal partners’ children. They found strong evidence that hav-
ing a daughter leads to an increased propensity to hire female
partners by venture capital firms. Second, improved gen-
der diversity improves deal and fund performances. “Taken
together, our findings have profound implications on how the
capital markets could function better with improved diver-
sity,” the authors wrote.2 But this study begets a fundamental
question — why did male VC partners only become sensitive
to gender diversity AFTER they had daughters? Did they not
have mothers? Sisters? Spouses? Or were they afraid that the
world would treat their daughters in an equitable manner?
Investment professionals need to establish practices to not
only increase diversity but also make it safer for all. How can
we develop the right methods to identify and respond to per-
ceived workplace harassment in its various forms? The failure
to catch and investigate sexual harassment can cause reputa-
tional and financial risk. In an anonymous sexual harassment
survey conducted by Investment Management Due Diligence
Association,3 the findings were quite appalling. LPs did not
care much about harassment either:
• 	89 percent of investment allocators do not inquire about
sexual harassment in the workplace.

-- 209 of 546 --

180 	The VenTure Firm’s eThos, CulTure, and Values
• 	82 percent of allocators do not ask follow-up questions
about sexual harassment if a manager declines to answer
questions.
• 	76 percent of allocators would still consider or invest
with a fund manager who has had issues with sexual
harassment.
• 	67 percent of allocators limit background checks to only
principals and senior staff.
• 	36 percent of allocators do not check social media for red
flags (e.g., inappropriate pictures and comments dispar-
aging women), indicating harassment is likely not on
their radar.
To address this gap, AllRaise, a diversity nonprofit, was
formed to encourage collaboration among women in the VC
and startup field. AllRaise seeks to push the number of female
venture partners to 18 percent within 10 years and to increase
the percentage of funding going to companies with a female
founder from 15 to 25 percent within five years. The group
holds small gatherings to teach women skills such as how to
serve effectively on boards. AllRaise says it has arranged intro-
ductions between startups and investors, leading to around 50
checks for startups.
As in any other social challenges, it is important for the
ones in majority to ask if they are open to accepting the diver-
sity or afraid of the change. What subconscious biases do the
majority follow, that prevents the minority from rising up as
equal partners?
Jess Lee, partner at Sequoia Capital says the firm has also gone
to great lengths to ensure she succeeds. To bring her on board,
two existing partners — Jim Goetz and Roelof Botha — went
the extra mile. Like all new partners, she was invited to board
meetings at portfolio companies and given an official mentor, to
decipher Sequoia’s weekly partners meetings and brainstorm
ways to help the six portfolio companies on whose boards Lee
serves. Sequoia now has four female partners. Pat Grady, partner
for over a decade at Sequoia, says that the firm wants to ensure a
diverse representation from all segments of the society.

-- 210 of 546 --

CULTURE AND VALUES 	181
Cosplay in a Café — Sequoia Hires a Partner
Shortly after Yahoo! acquired Polyvore, its CEO, Jess Lee,
agreed to meet Jim Goetz, a Sequoia partner, at a café in
Silicon Valley. When she showed up, she tried not to stare
at two customers at a nearby table dressed head-to-toe as
characters from Toy Story. After a few minutes, Woody and
Buzz Lightyear held up a watercolor of the cowgirl charac-
ter, Jessie, and other toys from the movie. Words beneath
read: “Will you join US on a new VENTURE?” The toys
then removed their headpieces: Woody was Goetz; Buzz
was Roelof Botha, another Sequoia partner who’d backed
Instagram and payment company Square. Lee, a cosplay
aficionado, was impressed. “It meant that I could bring my
whole self” to work, she says. She accepted the offer. 4 Botha
celebrated the successful close with a picture (Exhibit 16.2)
and a tweet — “It was a team effort.”
Exhibit 16.2 Sequoia goes the extra mile to recruit a partner.
Source: Sequoia Capital

-- 211 of 546 --

182 	The VenTure Firm’s eThos, CulTure, and Values
The archetype of the Firm: its operating system
Like any startup, the firm needs to build its brand identity.
However, many firms believe that a website and some fancy
logos are sufficient to create their brand identity. In an era when
entrepreneurs have choices, the venture firms need to weigh
the importance of branding their venture firm appropriately.
The venture firm can develop into several archetypes, some
of which include (a) group of cowboys; (b) a service agency;
and (c) a community platform.
The Firm as a Group of Cowboys
“I think of venture capital business as a series of individual
personalities, as opposed to a series of firms,”5 remarked James
Bryer of Accel Partners, former chairman, National Venture
Capital Association. Most firms operate as a crude aggrega-
tion of cowboys: each partner does his or her own thing. Each
partner works solo to find opportunities and bring these to the
table. On Monday morning, at the partner meetings, each cow-
boy tries to show other cowboys what a great catch he or she
has brought to the table. Often, a fight erupts to establish the
hierarchy. The smarter partners often preempt such brouhahas
by working behind the scenes, gathering the votes and elimi-
nating any objections. The discussions are often perfunctory
and awkward.
At its core, these cowboys need each other to raise money
because limited partners invest in teams, not solo performers.
So the soloists pretend to be a part of a symphony and raise
the fund, and then promptly go back to doing what they do
best — being cowboys. Down the road, when these opportuni-
ties start to struggle, the other cowboys may have that “I told
you so” look on their face. Cowboys are now forced down this
lonely path of trying to resurrect the dying opportunities. Oth-
ers watch, sigh, and move on.
Often, the CEOs of portfolio companies wonder why they
do not get much help from the other partners in the firm. In a
survey of over 150 CEOs, the differences in the views of the
CEOs and those of the venture capitalists (VCs) were indica-
tive of the chasm that exists between the two.6 CEOs care more

-- 212 of 546 --

CulTure and Values 	183
about partners than the overall firm and even less about the
reputation of a firm’s portfolio companies. However, most ven-
ture firms tout the past successes — IPOs or acquisitions — on
their websites. Partners brag about the string of the investment
successes when CEOs don’t necessarily care about them.
Limited partners are concerned about succession and the
strength of the overall firm. They seek a perpetual money
machine generating superior returns, not afflicted by indi-
vidual egos and limited life spans. But for entrepreneurs, the
individual personalities and reputations matter, not succession
issues. Entrepreneurs are attracted to the partners as much as
the money. A firm’s brand impacts their ability to attract the
best and brightest founders. But entrepreneurs don’t look at a
firm’s website as much as they consider what their peers and
third parties think about the firm. But star power is the begin-
ning: how the entrepreneurs benefit from the firm matters.
The Firm as an agency
For Andreessen Horowitz, the model of the venture firm is
simple: be the change you wish to see in this world. The firm
has modeled itself and blended values of three firms, a talent
agency — Creative Artists Agency (CAA) — and two financial
firms — Allen & Company and JP Morgan.
“We aspire to be like these firms. Allen & Company is a
boutique investment bank that, since 1920s, has gone through
generations of leadership and strategy but has preserved
its culture and value systems — which is remarkable as a
Wall Street firm. The original JP Morgan of the 1910–1920,
era . . . played a fundamental role in financing the build-out of
modern America,” says Andreessen.
Setting the Services Standard
We saw the opportunity to create the venture firm we as
entrepreneurs would have taken money from, had it ex-
isted at the time.7
—Marc Andreessen, Andreessen Horowitz

-- 213 of 546 --

184 	The VenTure Firm’s eThos, CulTure, and Values
Creative Artists Agency (CAA) is a Hollywood talent
agency that is said to be the entertainment industry’s most
influential organization, managing some 1,400 of the top tal-
ents in the acting industry. Their partnership was based on
teamwork, with proceeds shared equally. There were no name-
plates on doors, no formal titles, no individual agent client
lists. Practices followed the company’s two “commandments”:
Be a team player and return phone calls promptly. According
to Andreessen, the period of CAA’s growth under the leader-
ship of its founder, Michael Ovitz, had an enormous impact on
the talent management arena.8
Here are some lessons from these firms that have been
incorporated into Andreessen Horowitz’s operations:
• 	Focus on thought leaders and the best talent. Over the
years, CAA has kept its hold on the market by retain-
ing the best clients in Hollywood. It has captured a near
monopoly of A-list actors, directors, and writers. CAA
is aggressive when it comes to attracting talent, just as
Andreessen Horowitz may be when it comes to attract-
ing talented CEOs. At times, if CAA couldn’t get the
actors they wanted, they would poach the agents who
managed them, sometimes tripling their salaries, and
got their clients along with them. Similarly, Allen &
Company hosts an annual Sun Valley conference, which
attracts the thought leaders in media and technology as
well as politicians and policy makers.
• 	Create a one-stop shop. CAA’s original revenue model was
to rely on commissions from clients. As the business
started dropping for various reasons, it aggressively
expanded to become a one-stop shop for the entertain-
ment industry. Some of their services now include brand
management, communications, market research, trend
forecasting, and strategic marketing. CAA even helps
its celebs to turn into social mavens. Similarly, Andrees-
sen Horowitz aims to serve the portfolio companies in a
myriad number of ways. When it comes to helping port-
folio companies recruit talent, the firm has 11 recruiting

-- 214 of 546 --

CulTure and Values 	185
experts on staff. Cofounder Ben Horowitz calls it “HR in
a box,” and the firm measures success on the “introduc-
tion-to-hire rate.”9
• 	No-ego/team spirit. CAA’s corporate culture is a blend
of eastern philosophy and team sports. Team members
are encouraged to suppress their individual ego for the
benefit of the team. Every Monday morning, the 100
agents meet and share their own schedules and industry
developments. CAA shuns the media and likes to oper-
ate under the radar. Allen & Company, one of the under-
writers for the Google and Twitter public offering, does
not even have a website.
The Firm as a Community Platform
For larger firms, the ability to deploy resources is easier. For
smaller funds, the management fees often constrain the abili-
ties to build a large team. First Round Capital took a differ-
ent approach to tackling the issues. “We think of ourselves as
building a community, not a portfolio. Historically, value-add
was primarily delivered by a venture capital partner interact-
ing with a CEO. We think far more value can be delivered by
creating a community of founders, where each CEO in our
portfolio can help the others, and each CTO, each CFO, each
recruiter, each engineer,” says Josh Koppelman.10
First Round has a team of six people focused full time on
building products, events, and services to help connect the
companies with one another. “If you are the SEO person at a
startup, your job is pretty lonely and you don’t have many peers
to ask for help and advice. But we have over 30 people focused
on SEO in our portfolio, and are building software — including
an extremely active online network tool — to help them inter-
act with each other. Now, every time we invest in a company, it
actually adds value to our prior investments because there are
new smart people who participate in the dialog, rather than
subtract,” points out Josh Koppelman.
Brett Berson, head of platforms at First Round Capital,
manages a team of nine people. He says that such an online

-- 215 of 546 --

186 	The VenTure Firm’s eThos, CulTure, and Values
peer-to-peer teaching model changes the game. “Instead of
knowledge accumulation, we are ensuring disintermediation.
Let the best ideas come from the best people,” he says. The
platform, which includes a Yelp-like system for finding service
providers such as accountants and lawyers, is helpful to port-
folio companies. Portfolio CEOs, CTOs, and CFOs are all con-
nected with one another and post topics for others to chime in
on, such as how to motivate a distracted founder, structure a
compensation plan, plan for ad optimization online, or assess
the benefits of raising venture debt. “As a VC, we are now shift-
ing to platform-as-a-service,” says Brett. The platform model
is catching up. However, the usage in an open arena versus
closed loop can be different. Finally, the platform is not a sub-
stitute for mentoring, which is often more effective in person.
Until recently, ethos, culture, diversity, and values were not
a part of our vocabulary. But the industry is maturing, and we
are waking up to the importance of these fundamental build-
ing blocks. We can evolve and behave as better human beings.
Or we could denigrate into giant vampire squids, sucking all
the money we can from every crevice there is.
GoVernanCe oF The Firm
The governance of the firm primarily rests on the shoulders of
the head of operations, or, in smaller firms, the cofounders, or
the managing directors (see Exhibit 16.3).
Prior to formalizing a partnership, the fund’s founders need
to agree on the various operational matters, decision-making
guidelines for all operational matters, such as the following:
• 	Firm operations:
• 	Employee matters: Compensation, hiring, and fir-
ing processes
• 	Service provider selection: attorneys, accountants/
audit firms, marketing and PR-related activities
• 	Budgetary allocations
• 	Operations, ethics, and confidentiality matters

-- 216 of 546 --

GOVERNANCE OF THE FIRM 	187
• 	Investments:
• 	Investment committee composition: process of admis-
sion and selection of investment committee members
• 	Selection of venture partners and entrepreneurs-
in-residence
• 	Board participation:
• 	Best-suited member versus one who sourced the
opportunity
• 	Participation on conflicting company boards
• 	Post IPO, public board participation
The Firm’s Operational Guidelines
The founding partners establish guidelines that ascertain how
the following decisions are made:
• 	How are new individuals admitted or terminated from the GP
membership?
• 	Majority vote of number of current members.
• 	Majority vote by percentage of carry allocation.
HR and Talent Management
Employee matters, compensation, service providers
Operations
Back-office processes for management of LP
relationships
Risk Mitigation
Financial, cybersecurity, legal risks
Regulatory
Management of taxes,licenses, and various federal
and state guidelines
02
03
04
01
Exhibit 16.3 Operational elements of a well-governed venture firm.

-- 217 of 546 --

188 	The VenTure Firm’s eThos, CulTure, and Values
• 	Upon addition of new members, how will carry or economic
interest of existing members be diluted?
• 	Proportionally, all member shares are adjusted.
• 	Selectively, a few member shares are adjusted.
• 	Will investment decisions require unanimous vote or a major-
ity vote? How does the partnership agree to invest additional
amounts in portfolio companies?
• 	Under what conditions can a member withdraw or be
terminated?
• 	Cause: negligence, breach of conduct, fraud, SEC
or tax matters, personal financial situation, such as
bankruptcy.
• 	Membership withdrawal in challenging
circumstances — disability or death.
• 	Voluntary withdrawal.
Under each of the conditions above, the withdrawn mem-
bers’ financial interests are reviewed:
• 	Retain carry interest as it’s liable for clawback.
• 	Retains carry in existing investments, but no new carry
is offered.
• 	Forfeits carry completely.
• 	Is liable for pro rata share of capital contributions.
• 	Stays/resigns from portfolio boards.
• 	Investment committee structure, decision-making crite-
ria, and votes.
administration and operations: The Back office
Back- and middle-office operations are critical to a fund’s suc-
cess. Investors are paying more attention to the details; poor
or insufficient back-office administration is often a reason for
investors to forgo making an investment in the fund. Geor-
ganne Perkins of Fisher Lynch Capital, a fund of funds (FoF),

-- 218 of 546 --

GoVernanCe oF The Firm 	189
puts it bluntly: “If the GPs are equipped to handle other peo-
ple’s money, it can be a positive.” Put another way, any startup
with the requisite technical and financial oversight and controls
(a CFO) is attractive to any GP, and the same goes for any LP.
“Well-designed back- and middle-office operations provide
fund principals and investors with confidence that the data
they are receiving is correct — data integrity — and may be
used to base decisions on,” says Harry Cendrowski, author of
Private Equity: History, Governance and Operations. 11 Harry is also
the founder of Cendrowski Corporate Advisors, a back-office
services firm that offers financial services, taxation services,
and investor relations to a number of private equity and VC
firms. According to Harry, a back office can offer the following:
• 	Financial reporting. Fund and portfolio company finan-
cial reporting for limited partners and fund manag-
ers, and monitoring of portfolio company performance
is provided.
• 	Accounting. Accounting services are a critical component
of the back- and middle-office operations. Fund princi-
pals rely on the information generated in the accounting
system for decision-making (e.g., how much cash should
be distributed to investors; what are the cash needs of
the fund for future expenses?), inspiring investor con-
fidence (are capital accounts properly stated and com-
municated timely?), and their own economic interests
(are management fees properly calculated; are incentive
allocations properly calculated?).
• 	General and capital accounting. Bookkeeping functions,
posting journal entries, account reconciliations, prepara-
tion of financial statements, management of operating
cash, maintenance of the general ledger, including post-
ing of all transactions, is necessary for proper financial
and tax reporting.
• 	Tracking cash intake, basis in entities, maintenance of
investor capital accounts, and calculation of distribu-
tions is provided:

-- 219 of 546 --

190 	The VenTure Firm’s eThos, CulTure, and Values
• 	Maintenance of investor capital accounts is a criti-
cal function, as this is the primary measure that
investors rely on in assessing their investment. It
represents the investor’s economic interest in the
fund and is often the key component in determining
distributions as well as profit and loss allocations.
• 	Components of investor capital accounts include the
proper computation and documentation of capital
calls and distributions. Computation and docu-
mentation of capital calls allow the fund to meet its
obligations and commitments for fund expenses and
portfolio investments. Computation and documenta-
tion of distributions is critical to investor confidence
by indicating that fund principals are abiding by the
terms of the operating agreement. In addition, fund
principals need to know how much capital has been
committed, how much has been called, and how
much has been returned to investors.
• 	The proper allocation of economic and taxable
profits and losses is another reason why proper
maintenance of capital accounts is critical. Economic
income affects the investors’ right to distributions.
• 	Business valuation. A back office interfaces with fund
principals with respect to the valuation of portfolio
investments. 	Generally 	accepted 	accounting 	principles
(GAAP) basis financial statements must reflect invest-
ments at their fair value rather than historical cost. The
back and middle offices may provide assistance in the
valuation process and must ensure that the proper value
is recorded in the general ledger. ASC 820-compliant
(formerly FAS 157) mark-to-market portfolio company
valuations for fund return calculations are essential.
• 	Preparation of investor communications. Fund return cal-
culations, investment reports, and capital call notices
are included in communications. Pat Grady of Sequoia
Capital says, “At Sequoia, every partner takes turns in

-- 220 of 546 --

GoVernanCe oF The Firm 	191
writing the LP letter. It’s a reminder for us as to who we
work for.”
• 	Audits and taxes. A back office coordinates the annual
financial statement audit of the fund and is the primary
contact with auditors. It is the source of all the informa-
tion the auditors will be assessing in their examination.
As such, it is critical that the back office not only is able
to provide the necessary information in a timely man-
ner but also is able to provide explanations and answer
questions with respect to the information on the audi-
tor’s request. The back office is usually involved in the
preparation of fund tax returns and investor K–1s. In
addition, the back office is responsible for calculating
and documenting tax basis — the fund’s tax basis in
its investments as well as the investors’ tax basis in the
fund. Some back offices extend their services into offer-
ing consultative services in the partners and principals’
tax liabilities and goals, develop a plan to minimize
their tax liabilities, and/or enhance after-tax return on
investment.
Transferring responsibility for these activities to an inde-
pendent third party reassures limited partners that they are
receiving timely and accurate information. Administrative
resources at the fund level are freed up, permitting managers
to focus on scouting, screening, and harvesting deals. Costs to
the firm are further decreased, as these operations are typically
borne by the fund, not the general partners. Thus, it is in any
GP’s interest to establish strong business systems.
While building the firm’s brand is critical, establishing
the underlying fabric of economics, ownership, and culture
requires a diligent approach. For many first-time funds, the
fundraising activity often commences prior to formal estab-
lishment of structures.

-- 221 of 546 --



-- 222 of 546 --

17
193
Among the various exotic forms of self-flagellation, raising
the debut venture fund is high up on the torture scale. One
VC described a fund raise as “crawling on all fours” and then
he paused for effect “. . .on a steep uphill crawl” and finally
topped it off with “. . .sprinkled with some broken glass.” So
if you can smile cheerfully, while crawling uphill, on broken
glass, and live without a paycheck for two years, while invest-
ing your life savings in illiquid high-risk startups — this chap-
ter is for you.
Financially, emotionally, or intellectually, the fundrais-
ing journey will test your timbre and mettle in every possible
way — it does not get any worse. But if you can make it across
the finish line, you can rest for a day. And then start the real
work — multiply the capital by 3X in five years. Lindel Eak-
man manages fund investments for Foundry Group and has
been investing in venture funds for 15 years. “My first ques-
tion to anyone getting ready to raise their first fund is — are
you sure you want to do this?” he asks. And my second ques-
tion is, “Have you made enough money to risk two years of
your life without any current income — to withstand this jour-
ney?” Indeed, as romantic and cool of a career as it may appear
from the outside, the opportunity cost of raising a fund can be
very high.
Raising Your First Fund

-- 223 of 546 --

194 	Raising YouR FiRst Fund
FiRst stEPs
To start with, a fund’s investment strategy addresses these
basic questions:
1. Where 	do 	you 	see 	untapped 	opportunities 	for
investments?
2. Why are you best suited to generate superior returns?
3. Why now?
Untapped opportunities to generate returns can be found
across various technology sectors, geographies, and stages
of investments. But the other two questions fall harder on
most fund managers. Superlatives abound aplenty. Overarch-
ing statements like “I have a maniacal focus on generating
returns” have been used extensively, much to the chagrin of
LPs. It calls for honest self-assessment, combined with intellec-
tual rigor, objectivity, and willingness to accept that you could
be fallible. Some entrepreneurs use their business background
and relationship networks as a way to establish an edge. Angel
investors show their track record to demonstrate their chops,
as well as unique views of the market opportunity. Investment
bankers bring their analytical views to show how they can find
some hidden nuggets in the startup gold rush. There is really
no formula or ideal profile that defines a winner.
On the softer side, the ability to build relationships with
founders, compete for investment allocations in overheated
rounds, take measured risk, understand trade-offs, generate
financial returns consistently, and be able to work alongside
driven CEOs, those smart type-A personalities, is an essential
part of the business. “My goal is to pick an investment team
that’s aligned with a market opportunity, and has repeatable
access to the right entrepreneurs,” says Lindel. Chris Rizik is
the CEO of Renaissance Venture Capital, a fund of funds with
investments in over two dozen venture funds. “We see over
500 fund presentations each year — it is difficult for funds to
truly differentiate and stand out in this noise. They all begin to
sound the same after a while.”

-- 224 of 546 --

taRgEting LPs 	195
Strategy in venture firms is rarely unique, is ever evolving
and opportunistic, and at times is developed to appease inves-
tors. We will address fund strategy in greater detail in other
parts of this book.
taRgEting LPs
When Don Valentine, founder of Sequoia Capital, started his
fundraising journey, he recalled, “We went to see a guy at Salo-
mon Brothers, and he said, ‘You know, I’ve listened to the pitch,
but, you know, you didn’t go to Harvard Business School.’”
Valentine said, “Great observation. True. Guilty as charged. I
went to Fairchild Semiconductor Business School. Great business
school. Startup company. Pioneer in technology. Phenomenal
leadership and recognition. I don’t need to go to a business
school for what I’m gonna do.” He was rebuffed by this LP,
but Valentine’s father was a truck driver, and he had taught his
son some tenacity. He did not give up and found his first LP in
Southern California. Screening and targeting the right limited
partners is no different from a sales process — you have a lead
generation engine, qualification process, warm referrals, early
adopters, and closing. And you are tenacious.
David Cohen, co-founder of Techstars global accelerator,
has gone on to raise four venture funds. He warns, “You have
pick the right LPs. If you sell to everyone, you can become
overshopped and fatigued.”
Two primary questions should drive the selection process:
Are we a good fit for this LP? What value can we bring to them?
To screen for the LPs that matter, qualify them along
these criteria:
• 	Affinity for emerging managers. While some funds of
funds have dedicated emerging manager programs, oth-
ers seek established managers. An LP who prefers the
latter told me, “I don’t like to see GPs who are still in
kindergarten — they can call me after they cross Roman
numeral IV,” implying that funds that have a track
record of four fund cycles.

-- 225 of 546 --

196 	Raising YouR FiRst Fund
• 	Typical size of investment. Institutional investors have
no desire to create a large portfolio of small com-
mitments. Each fund commitment requires time and
effort to diligently manage the relationship, creating
an operational burden for the investor. To improve
internal efficiency in managing their portfolios and
generate their target returns, LPs often establish an
average check size. These checks are typically no more
than 15 percent of any fund. A $50 billion pension
fund may have to spend a lot of time and resources
to invest $10 million. And worse, even if that $10 mil-
lion investment in your fund were to generate a 3X
outcome after 10 years, the $30 million does not move
the needle for them. Typical investment size for such a
pension fund would be $50 million or higher. Further,
LPs often have a ceiling of, say, 15–20 percent com-
mitment of the total fund size. If a $50 million fund
were to approach a large pension fund, the 20 per-
cent commitment threshold caps them at $10 million,
which is too small a check for the pension fund. It’s a
classic Catch-22 situation, best avoided. The starting
qualifier ought to be — what is the average check size
of your commitment? If it’s more than 20 percent of
your fund size, it’s not a good fit. Kimon G. Pandapas,
member of the Global Investment Team at MIT Invest-
ment Management Company, says, “It’s not possible
to time venture or size in and out of venture firms.
Demand to be in the best firms, like Sequoia, is high,
so if you pass on a fund, you’re unlikely to get back in.
Investing through cycles is part of it. We are playing
the long game.”
• 	Affinity for sector and stage of investments. Does this LP
typically invest in sector/stage/geography of your
fund? Some LPs have found middle-market buyout to
be a suitable strategy; conversely, others have found
early-stage venture to be appropriate. Is the LP looking
to build a portfolio of technology funds? Or are they in a
maintenance mode?

-- 226 of 546 --

taRgEting LPs 	197
• 	Timing. Are they investing in VC funds currently? Do
they have an allocation available? When do they plan for
their yearly allocations? GPs are often surprised to hear
that most LPs plan their annual allocations at least six to
nine months in advance. The sales cycles are long and
opaque. A beleaguered LP told me, “We have many GPs
who expect to walk out with a check after one meeting.
My response to them is a polite version of — not tonight
darling, I have a headache.”
• 	Current portfolio. Are they planning on re-upping with
existing funds? Or bring on new funds in their portfolio?
This is another area most GPs ignore — adding a new
relationship means a lot of work for LPs, not to mention
additional risk. Re-upping in an existing relationship in
a high-performing fund is a lot easier for any LP.
• 	Past investment activity. Has the target LP invested in
similar funds? What are the average amounts? If an LP
has not invested in this asset class, be prepared to spend
inordinate amount of time in a long education process.
And frequently, after you educate the potential LP, you
might find that this LP has decided against investing in
this VC asset class—or worse, to invest in another, likely
better-performing fund.
• 	Process. Investment committees, votes, memos, dili-
gence, reference calls to CEOs, co-investors, background
checks . . . why do LPs take so long? Can’t they just wire
me the money after one meeting?
• 	Decision timelines. For some LPs, it is a few weeks — for
others, it’s a few years. One LP told me that they watch
a fund manager complete an entire cycle (raising a
fund, building a portfolio, exiting, and performance
review), — that’s a five-year dance. Are you prepared
to date for a long, long time, only to hear a possible no?
• 	Expectations. What does the LP expect from this relation-
ship? What constitutes a good partnership for them?
How do they define success? Do they prefer co-invest-
ing? Ask them. Please.

-- 227 of 546 --

198 	Raising YouR FiRst Fund
If you are a new fund with no brand, limited track record
and past performance, and raising in tough market conditions,
the process can take up to 18 months.
In Exhibit 17.1 the LP outlay variation can be seen by size of
funds. In any smaller, early-stage fund, the population of fam-
ily offices and high-net-worth individuals is significantly large.
When it comes to fundraising, the top-quartile established
venture firms have no problem raising money — they have a
first-world problem of cutting down the demand for LPs to
meaningful allocations. In the brief fundraising window, the
problem of excessive LP demand prevails — how to choose
from all those LPs kicking down the doors and ensure that
an appropriate share is allocated to each LP, when everyone
wants more. This is the classic first-world problem every GP
dreams of.
Recall that larger LPs, who typically have billions in assets
under management, would be underwhelmed with a tiny
share of a top-quartile fund. Even if the top-quartile fund dou-
bles its invested capital in 10 years, the overall impact on the
pension fund returns would be minimal. A drop in the bucket
doubles to two drops — still a minor trickle in a large pool.
Public pension
funds 35%
Funds of funds
19%
Corporate
pensions
12%
Insurance
companies
9%
Universities,
foundations,
and family
offices 9%
Banks
2%
LP Outlay in a Global Multistage Fund
Regional economic
development
10%
Local foundation
15%
High-net-worth
individuals 65%
Corporations
10%
LP Outlay in a $20M Early-Stage Fund
Other financial
institutions
14%
Exhibit 17.1 LP outlay varies by type of fund.

-- 228 of 546 --

MaRKEt tiMing 	199
When funds reach that top-quartile hot fund stature, the fund-
raising cycles become shorter and shorter as existing LPs tend
to stay put and the new LPs compete to get in. Leading funds
have no LP churn. On the other hand, several subpar or below-
average firms are able to sucker in newer LPs at every fund-
raising cycle.
MaRKEt tiMing
Institutional investors are often wary of new market opportu-
nities and move slowly and cautiously. Market timing is criti-
cal when it comes to fundraising. Investors are quick to point
out that “Why should I invest in your fund?” is not a question
that is as important as “Why should I invest in your fund now?
How is your investment strategy relevant in the present mar-
ket conditions?”
“LPs often adopt a market-driven and opportunistic
approach within their portfolio architecture,”1 remarks Chris-
tophe Nicolas, executive director, Morgan Stanley Alternative
Investment Partners, a fund of funds. Exhibit 17.2 shows how
various sub-asset classes within private equity compete for
investor capital.
If the institutional investors seek to rebalance their portfo-
lios or reduce their commitments, it is likely that a fund man-
ager may not have much traction in fundraising discussions.
“We have exited our relationships on several occasions when
we are overweighted in certain categories. At times, we find
that the number of relationships cannot be monitored effec-
tively,” says Kenneth Van Heel. On other occasions, fund man-
agers tend to be highly opportunistic in timing the raise of a
new fund. “I get a chuckle when I receive new fund documents
right after a big exit has occurred. The performance looks fan-
tastic, but most of us look past the short-term good news,”
quips one institutional investor.
For any fund manager getting ready to raise his or her next
fund, market timing is important but the amplitude of these shifts

-- 229 of 546 --

200 	Raising YouR FiRst Fund
must be closely timed with LP sentiment. Successful fundraising
is tied to performance as well as macro market conditions.
Fit WitHin tHE LP’s CuRREnt PoRtFoLio
Any institutional investor manages a number of portfolio rela-
tionships. Capital is allocated in various asset classes to bal-
ance risk and returns. In Beyond the J Curve: Managing a Portfolio
of Venture Capital and Private Equity Funds, authors Thomas
Meyer and Pierre-Yves Mathonet point out that institutional
LPs typically follow a top-down or a bottom-up approach, or a
combination of the two.2 In a top-down approach, an LP would
start with picking a sector (technology or life sciences), geo-
graphic region (Silicon Valley, Beijing, Israel), and stage (early,
growth, multistage).
A bottom-up approach is opportunistic and starts with
identifying suitable funds, conducting a thorough analysis,
performing due diligence, and completing the investment.
3%
8%
9%
11%
13%
14%
18%
23%
29%
54%
0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50 	60
Venture Debt
Fund of Funds
Venture - Seed
Venture - Late Stage
Venture - General
Venture - Early Stage
Buyout - Large to Mega
Secondaries
Growth
Buyout - Small to Middle Market
Exhibit 17.2 What’s hot and what’s not — LP view of opportunities.
Source: Adapted from, PREQIN INVESTOR OUTLOOK: ALTERNATIVE ASSETS, H1 2019.

-- 230 of 546 --

Fit WitHin tHE LP’s CuRREnt PoRtFoLio 	201
Most LPs tend to blend these two approaches. “We look at
every prospective deal in two ways: first in isolation, to see
that it stands on its own merits; and second, we see how the
deal fits in the context of our existing portfolio. We obviously
do not want to load the portfolio with a lot of [GPs] pursuing
the same strategy, but there are areas where we are actively
seeking greater levels of exposure,” says Peter Keehn, head of
alternative investments, Allstate Investments, managing $120
billion in assets.3
The chain of relationships is vast and intricate, as seen in
Exhibit 17.3; thus, any GP ought to qualify a target LP vis-à-
vis his or her current portfolio. While no LP publicly discloses
a portfolio, one LP suggests a simple approach: “We are try-
ing to build our relationships, like everyone else. If I get an
email asking whether we are looking to invest in early-stage
technology funds, I would have little hesitation in responding
with candor.”
A $50 billion state pension fund manager confessed that for
the right fund manager, we can always make room. “We design
our portfolio, but in general, we have always found room
to accommodate a good opportunity. We have a top-down
Private
Equity
Venture
Capital
United
States
Technology
Health Care
China 	Infrastructure
Buyout
Middle
Market
Large and
Mega	Distressed
Debt
Fund of
Funds Secondaries
Early Stage
Later Stage
Exhibit 17.3 LP portfolio — much more than VC.

-- 231 of 546 --

202 	Raising YouR FiRst Fund
approach with subgroups within private equity such as ven-
ture, buyout, mezzanine, distressed debt, and growth equity.
When we add a new fund, my allocation moves from 9 percent
to 10 percent, so it does not make a significant difference. But if
we are overweighed in a sector, say, I have eight biotech funds,
we are not going to go for the ninth, obviously. We do watch
allocations within each subgroup to ensure we are balanced.”
Chris Douvos uses a dinner table analog to help new
entrants understand the dynamics in any LP’s portfolio: “All
my GPs are like my children: I love them all, but they all
keep me up at night for different reasons. But I have a limited
amount of money. At my dinner table, I can ladle out only so
much soup. If you want to come for dinner, I have to send one
kid off to college or juvenile hall — my table is a crowded one.
If you are doing the same old same old thing, it’s not compel-
ling. What is it about your voodoo that would make me send
one of my kids packing?”
Any institution invests a considerable amount of time in
building a portfolio of relationships.
“Investors have invested the effort, completed the due dili-
gence, and committed to the marriage,” says placement agent
Gus Long. The easier thing for any investor is to commit addi-
tional capital to an existing relationship, often called a re-up. A
new manager means more work, more risk, and more uncer-
tainty for any institutional investor. Thus, for most new fund
managers, the competition is not from other new funds competing to
get in, but from the existing relationships — or, as Douvos puts it,
a crowded dinner table.
Finally, the hardest question — why now — a question
that rarely elicits any good answers. LPs have no incentive to
be the first-mover, nor move fast and break things, especially
their own job stability. Institutional investors are in the busi-
ness of generating predictable returns so that they can ensure
their own career stability, progression, and, ideally, their year-
end bonuses. A failed fund can reflect very poorly on any LP’s
resume. I have seen several GPs try the clichéd “you will miss
the train” pitch to create a rush and a sense of urgency, but
that’s a flawed approach. No LP has ever jumped in, and many

-- 232 of 546 --

Fit WitHin tHE LP’s CuRREnt PoRtFoLio 	203
have likely been turned off. For most LPs, there are plenty of
fish in the sea. As one fund-of-funds manager told me, “Most
GPs walk in thinking they are a special snowflake. They rarely
do the homework to understand the competitive pool of man-
agers, and their performance.”
What should your LP universe look like? A healthy practice
is often to target certain kinds of LPs because of the inherent
advantages they offer. A healthy mix of fund of funds, founda-
tions, family offices, and pension funds is ideal.

-- 233 of 546 --



-- 234 of 546 --

18
205
The Fundraising
Roadshow
Roadshows — that humbling time for most VCs when they
are not quite in charge, their ego is tamer, and no one feels
omnipotent for those 12–18 months. For some, it’s a walk in the
park — though past performance may not guarantee future
returns, it sure does guarantee short fundraising cycles. For
the less fortunate ones, the roadshow turns out to be worse, a
“shitshow,” as one GP woefully described it.
OVERVIEW: THE FUNDRAISING PROCESS
The process begins with researching LP targets, developing a
short list, kicking off the roadshow, and correcting course, as
needed. See Exhibit 18.1.
Having a data room ready, with all the relevant fund docu-
ments (see Exhibit 18.2), can accelerate the fundraising process.
Build a target list of investors, screen for a suitable fit, and get
going. The journey is long and hard, and, unfortunately, the
world of LPs has very few innovative and entrepreneurial think-
ers who can take meaningful risks on emerging fund managers.
GETTING IN THE LP DOOR
Most institutional investors typically see anywhere from 200
to 600 funds each year. With such a high volume, the best way

-- 235 of 546 --

206 	The Fundraising roadshow
Exhibit 18.2 Sample Data Room Folders.
Topic 	Remarks
Investor presentation 	Fund pitch deck, which outlines the fund strategy, team, portfolio construction, and
past performance
Team biographies 	Include detailed resumes of each member of the investment team, advisory board
members, operations (legal and finance)
Track record 	Spreadsheets detailing investments, returns and cash flows, including returns (IRR,
MOIC, TVPI, and DVPI)
Investment memos 	Sample investment memo for any portfolio company, showcasing the analytical rigor,
diligence, and return projections
References 	List of (a) founders, (b) investors, and (c) industry thought leaders who can speak to
the investment acumen of the team
Due diligence
questionnaire
A detailed questionnaire (see Appendix for template) that addresses all relevant
details of the fund in narrative form. Details that are included in the investor
presentation are often presented here with more detail.
Legal documents 	Limited partner agreement (LPA) and private placement memorandum (PPM), including
summary of investment terms, fees, carried structure, waterfall, and key-man risks
Operations/Policies 	Details relating to administration, tax, accounting, auditors, insurance, back-office
systems
Policies reacted to firm’s approach on (a) valuation, (b) conflicts of interests,
(c) insider trading, (d) diversity, (e) establishing healthy cybersecurity practices
Review
Progress /
Correct
Course
Research LP
Targets
Develop a
timeline
Kick off
the
Roadshow
Fundraising
Exhibit 18.1 Fundraising process.

-- 236 of 546 --

GETTING IN THE LP DOOR 	207
to stand above the ambient noise is to begin a relationship
through an introduction. Without a warm introduction, fund
documents that come in the door often head for the trashcan.
Institutional investors often like to take it slow and warm up
to a new fund manager over time, cautiously observing the
fund’s evolution and performance. G. Thomas Doyal, manag-
ing director of global private equity investments for a family
office, says, “We watch managers over several years and mul-
tiple investment cycles before we are ready to engage.” Doyal,
who sees about 50 fund documents each year, says, “It is very
unusual for us to look at anything cold.”1
To pave the way into a LP’s door, a trusted relationship,
ideally another peer-level investor, an existing GP within the
LPs current portfolio, or an attorney with proven credentials
can make this entry path much easier. An inappropriate start-
ing point could blow up this process very quickly. State pen-
sion fund managers often get calls from politicians, including
the governor’s office, gently suggesting to look at a fund. Such
pressure tactics, despite stellar performance, are unlikely to
yield a positive outcome, and such managers often start with
a deficit.
Getting in the door is the hard part, but the process from
screening, to diligence and final decisions often takes up to six
months, possibly longer. Once you get in, make sure the pres-
entation is executed flawlessly. GPs should start the meetings
by asking how the LP would like to best use the allotted time.
Rarely do LPs want to sit through a monologue. Let the LPs
review the deck ahead of time, and make it a conversation.
“A GP should approach the LP exactly the same way they
want an entrepreneur to approach them. I have been surprised
how few GPs can actually eat their own cooking when it comes
to making presentations,” says Chris Rizik. GPs should con-
sider approaching LPs from a customer-centric view: the LPs
should clearly see the benefit in investing in you. He laments,
“VCs demand superior pitch skills of their portfolio CEOs but
GPs seldom approach LPs with a clear fund value proposition.
If a GP can make it in the interest of that LP, they may actually
want to invest in the fund. This simple perspective seems to

-- 237 of 546 --

208 	THE FUNDRAISING ROADSHOW
be lost on a fair number of GPs,” says Rizik, who raised two
venture funds as a GP and now manages Renaissance Venture
Capital Fund, a fund of funds.
Really, that is your elevator pitch! That is a common
reaction after LPs have suffered lengthy, boring presentations
where GPs get into self-aggrandizing mode. Slide after slide
of ennui where GPs get into “and let me tell you about this
company . . .” mode has caused many LPs to wring their hands.
LP Pitch Guidelines: Don’t Fall Asleep or Appear Bored
LPs shared top-10 Dos/Don’ts for fund managers when meet-
ing with potential investors. Make sure you follow these:
• 	Don’t stretch a meeting to longer than 90 minutes. The
sale is not made in the first meeting.
• 	Don’t use superlatives in self-description.
• 	Don’t just address the older members of your audience.
• 	Don’t direct the first female in the room to “get you a
cup of coffee with milk and sugar.” That female could
be the decision maker.
• 	Don’t be late.
• 	Do make sure that no one on your team falls asleep or
appears bored during the presentation.
• 	Do be as transparent as possible about your successes
and nonsuccesses (aka failures). Take appropriate
credit for both sides of the equation.
• 	Do exhibit a sincere passion for what you do. Make it
seem like you’d still come into work every day, even if
you didn’t have carry.
• 	Do ask about the LP’s investment program and
approach. And appear interested in it.
• 	Do be clear about what you won’t invest in and why.
It’s okay to have skepticism/self-regulation about
areas outside your expertise.2

-- 238 of 546 --

GETTING IN THE LP DOOR 	209
If given a chance to present your pitch, drink your own Kool-
Aid. Remember when you chastised entrepreneurs about their
presentations being long-winded and off point? Your pitch
should be no more than a dozen slides and 15 minutes. This is
so basic, but rarely happens.
A lengthy 40-slide presentation, macro trends, and off-point
information will not further your cause. Having lived the life
on the other side as a VC, Chris is sympathetic about the chal-
lenges faced by any GP. Some pitch decks are as lengthy as
60 pages, which make LPs “want to get out of this meeting.”
Firms shouldn’t just stick to the pitchbook during meetings,
he says. “Try to get off the scripted stories and the pitchbook.
I love that.”3
Igor Rozenblit adds, “The goal of the meeting is for the LP
to collect information from the GP. The GPs should not spend
time telling us about their value-add to the portfolio. In my
opinion, most LPs do not believe that GPs add any value; thus, GPs
are better off focusing the time on answering LP questions during
the meeting.”
Do You Need Placement Agents?
Placement agents not only advise venture capital funds seek-
ing to raise a new fund but also broker much of the crucial
interaction with institutional investors and key players in the
private equity community. Expanding the investor base and
accelerating fundraising efforts, placement agents often act as
advisors and sounding board. Emerging managers as well as
more established firms look to placement agents to gain access
to new institutional investors and to streamline the logistics
of the fund-raising operations. Beyond opening new doors for
funds, agents also influence fund terms and offer advice on
market terms and conditions.
According to Preqin surveys, as many as 77 percent of
funds utilize the services of a placement agent, 63 percent of
which have exceeded their original target size. 4 Even though
the best funds don’t need placement agents, across the board,
institutional investors prefer to interact with placement agents.

-- 239 of 546 --

210 	THE FUNDRAISING ROADSHOW
A few reputed agents are able to build a matrix of institutional
investor relationships and reduce the friction in the process as
well. Igor Rozenblit, who led fund investments on behalf of a
$2.5 billion European financial services company, says, “Many
venture fund managers would not bother to do a primary
assessment of our investment criteria and send us completely
irrelevant fund memorandums. These would land in the dust-
bin quickly.” Other institutional investors agreed. Edgar adds,
“We get fund memorandums from all over the world — China,
India, Brazil — and a lot of these are not even relevant, nor fit
within our strategy.”
Several institutional investors highlighted the role of a
placement agent as being critical in the sourcing process. A
placement agent brings expertise and a set of relationships,
along with knowledge of market trends. These minimize the
friction any fund manager may face while raising a fund.
Good placement agents are inundated with solicitations
and are highly selective of engagements. For the right fund,
placement agents will risk their reputation and invest signifi-
cant time with the expectation of getting paid after the fund
is closed. Kelly DePonte, partner with Probitas Partners, a
leading placement agency, says, “I review 600-plus placement
memorandums in any given year, and barely a handful will
make the cut.” DePonte’s perspective comes from his interac-
tions with leading institutional investors across the world who
make multibillion-dollar decisions. Augustine “Gus” Long,
partner at Stanwich Advisors, points out that a good placement
agent functions as a proxy institutional investor. “If we cannot
gather enough confidence and comfort in the fund manager,
we do not engage,” remarks Long, who managed a $1 billion
fund of funds (FoF) prior to joining Stanwich Advisors. Rozen-
blit concurs that a good agent can make a significant impact for
the right firm: “The top venture firms do not need agents, and
on the other end of the spectrum, there are firms that are so bad
that even a placement agent will refuse to touch them. There
can be a few good venture firms in the middle who can ben-
efit from placement agents.” Thus, emerging managers with
some demonstrated track record, and a compelling strategy,

-- 240 of 546 --

GETTING IN THE LP DOOR 	211
ought to consider whether a Kelly or a Gus can make the uphill
task easier.
Investment banks like Credit Suisse and UBS have divi-
sions that offer placement agent services. These global entities,
operating from many offices with dedicated staff handling
multiple accounts for their private equity customers, can
access a larger pool of investors quickly. In addition to invest-
ment banks, there are also other global investment placement
and advisory firms that focus on providing placement agent
service. Unlike investment banks, however, these large inde-
pendent entities often work exclusively as placement agents.
Smaller boutique independent firms also provide placement
services, often focusing on a sector or geographical niche (e.g.,
the Middle East) or a select circle of investors. They may also
specialize in specific types of funds (e.g., funds of funds and
venture capital funds). “The big houses like Credit Suisse or
UBS typically send institutional investors a book of deals in
the market. You can pick a few and ask for more details. The
good placement agents research extensively and listen care-
fully. More so, even before they sign up a client, they know
who they will market it to,” says an investment fund manager,
working with a $50 billion pension fund.
The right placement agent can make a significant impact
during the fund raising process by providing insights in mar-
ket trends, identifying key relationships in institutional inves-
tor universe, and refining the strategy/pitch materials. Gus
said, “We spend a tremendous amount of time getting fund
materials ready, presentations and rehearsals to ensure consist-
ency of communication. Getting an hour with a leading insti-
tutional investor is difficult, but when you do get it, we make
sure that the fund manager can make the best use of it.”
Kelly DePonte points out the critical roles that a placement
agent plays in supporting venture capital funds:
• 	Market intelligence and social capital. Placement agents
offer connections and a solid base of contacts for their
clients, but they are much more than a glorified Rolo-
dex or phone book of investors. Rather than serving as

-- 241 of 546 --

212 	THE FUNDRAISING ROADSHOW
a static database of names for private equity funds, the
best placement agents are aggressive trackers, watching
the shifts in personnel, sniffing out sector trends, and
monitoring investment appetite in the allocations of pri-
vate equity. In hiring placement agents, funds gain more
efficiency in their fundraising efforts by benefiting from
the agents’ targeted approach rather than by relying on
shallow leads and marketing plans. 5 Agents keep a con-
stant check on the pulse of the market, honing long-term
insight and an instinctual know-how on what relation-
ships work or don’t work. Placement agents also pro-
vide access to new investors and sources of capital. As
one fund manager pointed out, when trying to raise a
larger fund, you have to talk to new investors — stran-
gers — and a placement agent can simplify this process.
• 	A guide on fund terms and trends. Finally, placement
agents offer value to venture capital firms by keeping
fund managers informed about fund terms and con-
ditions before going to market. Agents are aware of
institutional investor demands on economic and legal
trends such as distribution waterfalls, no-fault divorce,
clawback provisions, and more. From their interactions
with investors, placement agents can predict how the
investment market will react to fund terms and condi-
tions, as well as adapt to shifting economic and govern-
ance provisions. Venture capital fund managers should
look for placement agents who can appropriately
address the market to your fund type. Agents focusing
on international funds can seldom assist a seed-stage
fund. Besides possessing insights of the LP commu-
nity, agents often share their expertise in due diligence.
On the other side of the coin, as institutional investors
become increasingly selective about the funds they
invest in, the placement agent’s role becomes more crit-
ical than ever in smoothing communication and man-
aging process between general and limited partners,
particularly for emerging funds. Though many limited
partners want to invest in safe bets and brand-name

-- 242 of 546 --

GETTING IN THE LP DOOR 	213
Let Me Help You Help Yourself
Placement agents allow fund managers to “focus on [their]
core competency — deal making.” Placement agents save a
fund from being distracted on the lengthy and painful pro-
cess of fundraising — a necessary but often periodic step.
“You only raise funds every four, five, six years, [so] you
can’t do it as well as a professional,” said Doug Newhouse,
whose fund was oversubscribed.
Placement agents are key strategists in determining the
details of a fundraising campaign, such as a target fund size,
investor expectations on staffing and professional back-
grounds, selection of the right legal team, and other launch
details that might be overlooked, even by more experienced
fund managers or fund managers overseeing multiple funds.
They also play an indomitable role in marketing, giving
advice on putting together a scalable mix of investors who
not only are willing to commit but also have the resources to
do so given a difficult market. With their close contacts, they
often have a better sense of the investor market than does a
venture capital fund manager. Also, in taking a lead nego-
tiator role in interfacing with investors, placement agents
can advise on the right timing for a launch by gauging the
strengths and handicaps of investors. More importantly,
placement agents can sustain the momentum in a marketing
or fundraising campaign. By moving swiftly in these areas, a
fund is brought to a close much faster and avoids languish-
ing and being dubbed unimportant or irrelevant by investors
faced with a wide range of opportunities.
Gus Long said, “The fund-raise process is a step function —
the objective of the first meeting is not to get signed subscription
documents — the objective is to get to the next step, which is on
site for due diligence. For some institutional investors, it’s three
steps, and for some it’s 20 steps — but you have to be ready at
every step. A qualified team without the right form and deliv-
ery can kill the investment. There are groups that should get
funded but do not because they cannot communicate their story
effectively . . . that part of our preparation process is often pain-
ful, but that’s where we make the biggest impact.”6

-- 243 of 546 --

214 	THE FUNDRAISING ROADSHOW
funds, they are also willing to invest in new funds if an
accomplished placement agent brokers the deal. Place-
ment agents are particularly supportive of new ven-
ture capital funds run by managers with a strong track
record. Igor Rozenblit, who represented a $2.5 billion
European financial services company seeking invest-
ments in venture capital and private equity funds,
would frequently interact with some of the top place-
ment agents such as UBS, Credit Suisse, Lazard, and
Park Hill. He says: “Some fund managers may not be good
at exaggeration, but the placement agents are gifted at it.
Placement agents would usually puff things up — and
the top worn-out clichés of placement agents ignored
by most institutions include statements like, ‘We have
soft-circled about two-thirds of the fund . . . or this is the
hottest fund to date’ . . . and the best one ‘It’s going to
be oversubscribed — we are closing tomorrow.’” Rozen-
blit quipped that agents who are too slick can hurt the
fund, or lose credibility for both parties. “In one case,
we closed one month after the final close — the agent
was not happy.”
LOCKING YOUR ANCHOR INVESTOR
A good lead (or an anchor) investor can act as a source of other
introductions, be a powerful reference, and greatly improve
your chances of raising the fund. GPs should focus their early
efforts on attracting such a kingmaker. But finding someone
who will take a leap of faith is not easy.
Once a lead investor has committed, the GPs ought to con-
tinue to attract those fast followers, and finally those laggards,
who will come in days before the final close. The only proven
way to attract these is to communicate effectively.
Consider ARCH Venture Partners’ ability to find a lead
investor for their Fund I. On a Saturday afternoon, Steve
Lazarus, founder of ARCH, was able to pitch a vice chairman

-- 244 of 546 --

LOCKING YOUR ANCHOR INVESTOR 	215
of an insurance company. This potential LP took a break dur-
ing his tennis game and committed $4 million by the end of
the hour-long meeting. “I had my nut, and from that point the
money rolled in,” Lazarus would say. 7 ARCH raised $9 mil-
lion for its Fund I. Newer funds are better suited in targeting
a larger number of smaller investors, such as high-net-worth
individuals and family offices.
Look for an anchor investor — an entity that will commit
at least 10% of the total fund, possibly even 20% — and be
the first mover. In the world of institutional investors, every
entity is competing to be a fast follower. The first mover has
to do some serious heavy lifting, similar to a lead investor in a
startup. The diligence process often takes four to six months,
depending on the complexity.
Snagging That Lead Investor: Lessons from
Dick Kramlich, Founder of New Enterprise
Associates (NEA)
LP: “So, let me get this straight. You’re talking about us putting
up a million dollars, right?”
Kramlich: “Yes, sir.”
LP: “You’re talking about not telling us how you’re going to
invest it, is that right?”
Kramlich: “Yes, sir, that’s correct.”
LP: “And you’re telling me this money is going to be illiquid for
12 years, is that right?”
Kramlich: “That’s correct.”
LP: “You’re telling me, you all, as a group, have no track record,
and you’re not promising any rate of return, is that right?”
Kramlich: “Yes, sir, that’s right.”
“So finally, this LP says, “Well, if you all feel comfortable
taking the risk, I’ll support you.”
This LP invested $1 million in NEA Fund I, which was
~$16 million in size. 8

-- 245 of 546 --

216 	THE FUNDRAISING ROADSHOW
SELL, SELL, SELL
A good VC is a salesman at heart. First you sell your vision
for your fund to potential limited partners. Once you raise
a fund, you have to then sell your intangible value-creation
skills to an entrepreneur, so that they take your money over
other competitive investors. And then, after you invest in port-
folio companies, you have to sell those companies to custom-
ers, potential employees, and acquirers. A salesman is often
misconstrued to be the likes of a used-car peddler — slick,
fast-talking, and nimble-fingered, leaving you stuck with a
product you never wanted. A VC as a salesman is more intel-
lectually driven, uses data, market knowledge, and competi-
tive dynamics to understand the landscape. Having strong
persuasive skills is a must, so is tenacity and a never-give-up
attitude. A good VC can push appropriately, understand the
decision-making process, timelines, and find all the touch-
points and triggers that would lead to a favorable decision.
At the same time, be willing to walk away from anyone that
is spinning you around in infinite loops without any clarity
or confidence.
The process of managing multiple LP relationships effec-
tively and leading these to a close is fraught with uncertainties
and challenges. GPs who were successful pointed out that they
followed some simple guidelines:
• 	Communicate. Any potential investors with whom you
met would like to know how you are progressing with
your fundraising efforts. A steady flow of meaningful
communication, timely but not excessive overload, can
help a GP to gain ongoing mindshare with LPs.
• 	Create momentum. The ability to create momentum with
LPs is an art form, akin to rolling a snowball downhill
and making sure that it arrives at its destination in one
piece. Tying momentum and communication together,
an example could be, “In the past 90 days, we have added

-- 246 of 546 --

SELL, SELL, SELL 	217
commitments of an additional $10 million, raising our
total commitments to $25 million. These commitments
include a family office, several HNWIs, and a strategic
corporate investor.”
When Liam Donohue, co-founder and managing director
of .406 Ventures, was raising Fund I, he successfully attracted
$167 million in the tough economic environment. “About
90 percent of our fund was raised from institutions. It took one
year to get it done from first close, 18 months from start to
finish. LPs tested us at every step. We were politely persistent
and created momentum. It is a lot of work and not for the faint
of heart,” he says. After 10 years, .406 Ventures has raised four
funds and has over $650 million under management.
LPs often struggle with the same challenges that most VCs
do — speed, decision-making, communication, and respon-
siveness. In Exhibit 18.3, we list some common challenges that
GPs encounter in fundraising.
GPs cannot do much in managing LP behavioral challenges
except grin and bear it. Some move on. Others endure the
nausea-inducing roller coaster ride.
Maybe You Are Just Not Ready for Venture Capital . . .
When a potential LP is indecisive, drags their feet, and is
firmly perched on a fence, how do you convince them to take
the leap? “Maybe you’re just not ready for venture capital,”
William Draper III told a potential LP, debating over a $10
million commitment.
“Oh, no, no, no,” the LP said. So all of a sudden, the cards
turned and he signed it.
The LP committed, although Draper Gaither Anderson
did not ever invest the entire $10 million. They invested $6
million and returned ~$750 million to their happy investors.9

-- 247 of 546 --

218 	THE FUNDRAISING ROADSHOW
SHOULD YOU WAREHOUSE PORTFOLIO COMPANIES?
Chris Douvos, managing director of Ahoy Capital, a Silicon
Valley–based fund of funds, has been investing in venture
funds for two decades. One of the pioneers of the micro VC
movements, Douvos is a rare LP who can quote Walt Whitman,
Shakespeare, and Heraclitus while discussing IRR, MOIC, and
TVPI. “Having a strategy is a good start, and a team that aligns
with the strategy is even better. But what I’d love to see is your
strategy in action,” he says. There is no other “proof of con-
cept,” indeed, than to put your money where your mouth is,
and show a portfolio in creation. Building an initial portfolio
demonstrates:
• 	Sourcing abilities — you can find the right companies.
• 	Ability to structure the right transaction — did you pay
the right price?
Exhibit 18.3 GPs view of LP Behavioral Challenges.
Challenge 	Manifestation
Engagement 	Lack of responsiveness to emails and calls. Unclear if they are open for
business, interested, busy, or just lazy.
No clarity on fit or timing. GPs are often shooting in the dark.
Process 	Diligence can be formulaic, cumbersome, and heavy. One solo GP pointed out
that his previous fund was $5m, and I was raising a small $25m fund, but
got “a 60-fucking-page-long due diligence questionnaire”. “They asked for a
PPM when all I had was a deck. I mean, they could have just told me to go
away instead”.
Diligence might be initiated but drags on forever. No clarity on next steps,
timing, and decision-making process. As one fund manager pointed out,
“After six months of diligence, the LP vanished. We cannot do anything but
grin and bear it, as we may need them in our next fund.”
Decision-Making 	“No sense of urgency. Slowed down closing just because they could. Did not
respect our timelines.”
“One of our existing LPs took six months to let us know they would not come
in for our next fund. It hurt us significantly and drastically slowed down
our close timing. LPs have no accountability and behave carelessly when it
comes to treating GPs.” – GP on Fund III
Overall 	“LPs lack creativity, speed, and decisiveness. They are worried about career risk
and capital/self-preservation. We seek the very opposite qualities in our
founders. As a GP, sitting between these two sides is schizophrenic, and has
been my biggest challenge in the VC business” — anonymous GP

-- 248 of 546 --

YOUR BIGGEST FUNDRAISING RISKS 	219
• 	Your ability to win — not only can you find good com-
panies, but you can get a seat at a crowded cap table and
win an entry into a hot company. If the hot company has
brand-name co-investors, it often acts as an advantage
and (superficially) validates your picking abilities. I have
seen fund managers warehouse as many as four to six
companies as they start their fund raise. It is not impor-
tant to write significantly large checks (by all means, do
so if you can), but it’s more so a demonstration of your
ability to put the strategy in motion.
Finally, one of the subtle advantages of a warehoused
portfolio is that, as you continue your fund raise, some of
these companies are likely to step up in value. Some bar-
gain hunters can get enticed to invest in your fund, as they
will appreciate an “immediate” step up in value, albeit on
paper.
YOUR BIGGEST FUNDRAISING RISKS, AND HOW
TO MANAGE THEM
For every fund that crosses the finish line, there are three
that die along the way. The story goes like this — a group
of spectacularly accomplished individuals facing mid-life cri-
sis, boredom, unexpected large inflows of free cash flows, or
other first-world challenges team up and decide to dabble.
After all, venture capital has all the right ingredients to bring
about the enviable level of attention at a wine gathering. Its
social cachet is strong. Funds that get started off with a whiff
of boredom rarely make it — the ones that get started by hun-
gry, driven individuals who have a chip on their shoulder
often make it past the finish line. They are out to prove their
chops in this world and are the unstoppable ones. Funds die
due to many reasons, but the most frequent reasons are listed
in Exhibit 18.4.
Of the many funds that have struggled, some have gone
out in epic flameouts, complete with trumpets blaring. Others
have recovered to find a new day.

-- 249 of 546 --

220 	THE FUNDRAISING ROADSHOW
Social Capital lost its investment team due to differing
views on strategy. The two partners at XFund, a $100 million
fund, got into a messy legal fight, calling each other names like
“spiteful moron,” leading to one founder being banished from
USA. At Rothenberg Ventures, its founder Mike Rothenberg,
who boasted of the twitter handle @VirtualGatsby was accused
by SEC of defrauding his limited partners upward of $7 mil-
lion by throwing lavish parties. The SEC also came knocking
at Burrill Life Sciences, where over $4.5 million was spent on
family vacations to nice summer resorts at St. Bart’s and Paris.
Exhibit 18.4 Key Risks in Fund Raise.
Risk 	Remarks
Team falls apart 	Most partnerships disintegrate due to lack of endurance, alignment, or emotional
compatibility. Cohesion of team is one of the biggest challenges in the 18- to
24-month fund-raise journey. An investment team member may decide to
shift gears and chase a lucrative current income opportunity. Or members
could be misaligned in their distribution of roles, responsibilities, and
share of carried interests. Often, strong personalities are unable to build a
mutually respectable working relationship, due to constant bickering and
political drama.
Unproven team 	Investment team members do not have an enviable track record, showing
superior returns.
No anchor investor 	A number of small commitments keep trickling in, but there is no significant
commitment to make it across the finish line.
Inadequate financial
buffer
Besides living without a paycheck for two years, managers often have to self-fund
the warehoused portfolio companies, operating, legal, and travel expenses.
Market timing 	The markets are driven by LPs’ focus areas. If they choose to get excited by
“middle-market buyout funds” or if macro events freeze LP allocations, not
much can be done.
Fund strategy 	Undifferentiated strategy follows me-too approach to investments. Lacks
sourcing advantages. In some cases, fund size in not correlated with stage of
investments.
Lack of focus 	Fund managers try to do too many supplemental activities to stay afloat while
fund raising. Several funds have fallen apart because managers consulted
on the side, or even acted as investment-bankers in a few cases. Fundraising
demands 110% from you, and LPs can smell your conviction, or lack thereof.

-- 250 of 546 --

19
221
“Our best investment ever was in a first-time fund.” This
remark by Sergey Sheshuryak of Adams Street Partners, a fund
of funds, could well be the saving grace and sales pitch for
every first-time fund manager. For most institutional investors
and limited partners, an emerging manager — or a practitioner
who has yet to demonstrate superior returns in a consistent
fashion — is a huge risk. But for others, it is a great opportu-
nity. Take the example of Steven Lazarus, founder of ARCH
Venture Partners. When Lazarus started to raise ARCH Ven-
ture Partners Fund I, investors would say, “Your track record
is all ahead of you.”1 Those investors threw Lazarus in the
emerging manager box and dismissed him. ARCH Fund I cel-
ebrated four IPOs as well as four acquisitions and generated
22 percent internal rate of return (IRR). 2
The changing industry offers new opportunities for inves-
tors to access investments outside the mainstream venture
capital universe. For institutional investors, striking a balance
between established fund managers and tilting (even slightly)
in favor of emerging managers is increasingly becoming the
norm. In building more mixed portfolios with funds man-
aged by premier names, as well as funds managed by emerg-
ing managers, investors can build dynamic and diversified
portfolios and ensure risk-adjusted returns over the long run.
Eric Doppstadt, VP and CIO at Ford Foundation, says, “We
rarely backed those who did not have a realized track record.
Why LPs Seek First-Time
Funds

-- 251 of 546 --

222 	WHY LPs SEEK FIRST-TIME FUNDS
Today, we have to look at this universe with a somewhat dif-
ferent lens. We often ask, ‘Why do founders want this investor
on their board?’ and, ‘Do the best founders want this investor
on their board?’” Kimon G. Pandapas, member of the Global
Investment Team at MIT Investment Management Company,
says, “We back firms with strong brands because brand drives
deal flow. Top-tier firms like Sequoia Capital and Greylock
have massive brands, which puts them on most founders’ top
five list. But the industry is constantly evolving, so we try to
stay alert to emerging firms with distinct competitive advan-
tages and the potential to develop dominant brands.”
Several criteria are often used in identifying emerging
managers. At one end of the spectrum, they may be “first-time
fund, first-time investors” — a group of professionals who lack
significant investment experience. They may also be a group
of individuals who have experience but no track record work-
ing as a cohesive team. There could also be spin-offs of exist-
ing, more established funds. Partners who have raised money
on a deal-by-deal basis and built their track records would be
appropriate candidates for raising funds.
But limited partners (LPs) prefer experienced investors who
have played the game well, or who bring some unique chops to
the game. Christy Richardson, director of Private Investments
at Hewlett Foundation, says, “We reach out to 50 fund manag-
ers each year and narrow down the funnel, adding one new
manager every two years or so. The odds are steep. The one
big criterion for us is, “Does the GP have access to the best deal
flow? It’s a ground war out there — can you win the best deals?”
As Gus Long of Stanwich Advisors points out, “First-time
fund is acceptable, but not a first-time investor.” As venture
firms grow, partners who perform well run into incentive shar-
ing and succession issues. 3 These issues may cause the stronger
partners to split and form new firms, where they are in better
control of their destiny, the brand, and the economics. Such
investors are often well received due to their existing network
and investment experience.
Finally, women or minorities who have been traditionally
underrepresented are often dubbed as emerging. Emerging

-- 252 of 546 --

CREATIVITY, HUNGER, AND PERFORMANCE 	223
managers compensate for their perceived shortcomings in
many ways, offering a unique edge for investors.
CREATIVITY, HUNGER, AND PERFORMANCE
Kelvin Liu of Invesco Private Capital, a fund of funds, writes
that “since they do not have historic challenges of poor perfor-
mance, they are able to pursue unique investment strategies.”4
As mavericks in the capital markets, they often have stronger
motivations.
According to Hany Nada, cofounder of GGV, “When we
started GGV-I, it was the aftermath of the dot-com crash in
2001 — one of the toughest periods to launch a new fund.
Our compelling investment strategy was an important factor,
but the only reason we made it during the tough economic times
was because we were ‘all-in’ — a 110 percent commitment in
making this fund successful. We had burnt all boats and there
was no plan B. The LPs could sense this commitment.”
As a result, they are more fiercely driven toward achieving
high performance and results right out of the starting gate and
evolve to be nimble in their decision-making. With entrepre-
neurial sensibilities, they often seize the market opportunities
that their more established colleagues would balk at. In many
ways, they run faster and have less to lose and more to gain
from investing smarter than the bigger players.
Underdogs looking to prove themselves, they are often
more flexible in working with investors, resulting in a greater
alignment with investor interest. LPs and investors often take
bigger percentage shares in their funds — larger than the typi-
cal 10 percent cap. Empowered, investors can then wield influ-
ence on decisions, terms, and fees. 5 “We don’t mind being a
disproportional part of the fund — in some cases we invested,
say $5 million in a $40 million fund, and in others, we have
about $19 million in a $50 million fund,” says John Coelho of
StepStone Group.6
Often, emerging managers integrate a different cultural
mind set. Much more open, some share their views in blogs

-- 253 of 546 --

224 	WHY LPs SEEK FIRST-TIME FUNDS
and live a transparent life. Their way of doing business makes
their more established counterparts look downright prosaic
and even backward.
The general misperception of emerging managers is that
they lack the experience and track record. Within the insti-
tutional LP community, the perceived risks in investing in
emerging managers are high, because these are perceived as
ill-equipped, untested, and unseasoned neophytes. In essence,
they were dismissed as minor league players in the world
dominated by juggernauts.
All these qualities — smaller fund size, a taste for nontradi-
tional investment strategy, drive, and innovation — are elevat-
ing emerging managers among those investors looking for a
different path toward success.
RANKING EMERGING MANAGERS
Rarely does an LP make an investment decision solely on the
fact that a general partner (GP) is emerging — it may get a
GP’s foot in the door, which is a good start. A pecking order,
as seen in Exhibit 19.1, establishes the probability of raising an
institutional fund.
The primary risk that any LP faces with emerging managers
is career risk. After all, why would LPs risk the embarrassment
of losing their capital (and their job) with an unproven man-
ager? “It’s a lot safer to invest in Fund V,” says John Coelho of
StepStone Group.7 Factors that impact LP decisions include the
following:
• 	Ability to distinguish between market hype and mar-
ket reality
• 	Strong knowledge base/domain awareness
• 	Differentiators of the fund strategy
• 	Sustained differentiation: Barriers to entry from other
competitive investors
• 	Team dynamics and cohesion

-- 254 of 546 --

RANKING EMERGING MANAGERS 	225
And the signal-to-noise ratio in this category is signifi-
cant. “Over the past eight years, we have seen 1,100 emerg-
ing manager funds and have invested only in 36,” says Amit
Tiwari, director at Invesco Private Capital. 8 Some managers
deliberately slot themselves in this “emerging” category to
gain attention from LPs, a ploy that is not necessarily advan-
tageous. After being hounded by one firm for too long, an
LP acerbically commented: “You have been emerging for too
long — just call me back when you have actually emerged!”
Emerging managers tend to be sought out by high-net-
worth individuals (HNWIs) and family offices rather than by
established institutional investors.9
Amidst the LP universe, funds of funds are more open
to emerging managers and have specific mandates (see
Exhibit 19.2). Major institutional investors, such as California
Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS) and Cali-
fornia State Teachers’ Retirement System (CalSTRS) actively
invest in emerging manager-led funds. The effort is dubbed
as “building investment portfolios that tap into the chang-
ing demographics and talent emerging in California and the
nation.” 10 For investment authorities at CalPERS and CalSTRS,
the decision enables beneficiaries to access an untapped and
Emerging Managers
Spin-out teams from existing firms,
strong track record, clear
attribution, multiple years
of investment history
Small teams with some working
history, institutional expertise,
and investments
First-time managers, no working
history, invested as angels, no
realizations
Exhibit 19.1 Emerging managers — a pecking order.

-- 255 of 546 --

226 	WHY LPs SEEK FIRST-TIME FUNDS
dynamic market. A chief investment officer for CALPERS once
noted that “it’s easy to miss emerging firms that are still strug-
gling to raise capital. . . . Most large firms started at the small
end of the market and we want to find them on the small end
of their asset class. Then we won’t have to stand in line for
their services on the big end later.”11
In LP surveys, 42 percent of the world’s top 100 LPs were
open to considering first-time funds. In partnering with emerg-
ing managers, investors have touted many benefits — early
access to industry leaders, gains from better returns, higher
rates of proprietary deal flow, and a management focus on
maximizing profits rather than on increasing assets under
management. 12
A FUTURES OPTION
Kenneth Smith, of Park Street Capital, says, “My primary
approach to emerging managers is to identify those super-
performers who will be hard to access in later funds.” 13 Often
11%
16%
33%
40%
Spin-off funds only
Will consider investing
Will invest
Will not invest
0% 	10% 	20% 	30% 	40%
L.P. View of First Time Funds
Exhibit 19.2 LPs’ preference for investing in first-time funds.
Source: Adapted from, Private Equity & Venture Capital Spotlight, February 2017. Preqin Ltd.

-- 256 of 546 --

A FUTURES OPTION 	227
hungrier, they have a passion for investing in new platforms
or in emerging markets such as Brazil and China. Grove Street
Advisors, a fund of funds (FoF), has developed a simple yet
effective technique to build an emerging manager portfolio
(see Exhibits 19.3 and 19.4): make small commitments and
build up the position as the performance improves.
Established
Proven Top Tier
Emerging
New
Expected Performance
Time
Stability?
Life Cycles of Private Equity Fund Managers
Fund I 	Fund II 	Fund ...
Exhibit 19.3 Fund-of-funds allocation for an emerging manager portfolio.
Source: Grove Street Advisors, “Case Study 1,” May 10, 2001, accessed February 20, 2011, www.grovestreetadvisors.com/news/
gsa_case_study_01.pdf.
Initial Fund
Commitments = 9
Funds × $5M
Emerging Top Tier
= 3 × $10M
Top Tier
= 3 × $25M
Top Tier
= 3 × $50M
Still Unproven = 3
× $5M 	Median = $0M 	Median = $0M
Early Poor
Performace
= $0M
Poor = $0M 	Poor = $0M
Exhibit 19.4 Concentrating capital with top performers.
Source: Grove Street Advisors, “Case Study 1,” May 10, 2001, accessed February 20, 2011, www.grovestreetadvisors.com/news/
gsa_case_study_01.pdf.

-- 257 of 546 --

228 	WHY LPs SEEK FIRST-TIME FUNDS
Pension programs have demonstrated staunch support for
minority representation among their emerging funds. Thus,
the definition of emerging has expanded to include demo-
graphic factors as well as performance. CalPERS’s alterna-
tive investment management (AIM) program explicitly states
that its goal is to invest in women-owned or minority-owned
funds. Kristine Brandt, director and CEO of Invesco Private
Capital, said, “The economy is global, so you have to have a
global mind set. . . . In order to build better companies, in order
to come up with the next best widget, I really think that diver-
sity is required.” 14

-- 258 of 546 --

20
229
Sourcing Investment
Opportunities
OVERVIEW: THE SOURCING PROCESS
“I give a lot more importance to sourcing, even more than the
value-add claims of VCs,” says Erik Lundberg, chief invest-
ment officer of University of Michigan Endowment. 1 While
typical sources of investment opportunities lie embedded
within the network for founders — the social fabric woven
over time that yields consistent quality referrals — the future,
as they say, is in data-driven sourcing.
Venture firm SignalFire has raised over $300 million
as it built its investment thesis as a data-driven fund. It has
developed a data platform, called Beacon, which tracks more
than half a trillion data points. SignalFire is different from
the average venture fund, says one of its LPs, Lance Cottrill,
a partner with Horsley Bridge Partners. As an LP in venture
firms such as Index Ventures, Benchmark, and Andreessen
Horowitz, fund of funds Horsley Bridge has seen various
investment strategies. It invested in SignalFire’s maiden $50
million fund alongside 50 other tech and venture professionals.
“It piqued our interest. This is software eating the venture
model,” Cottrill remarked. 2
Chris Farmer, founder of SignalFire, who spent his early
years at General Catalyst and Bessemer Securities, interviewed

-- 259 of 546 --

230 	SOURCING INVESTmENT OPPORTUNITIES
500 founders and over 150 funds about the strengths and
weaknesses of venture capital. As their platform, Beacon
tracks more than 4 million companies, over 8.5 million engi-
neers, and billions of anonymized US consumer financial trac-
tions, SignalFire is able to bring unique insights in growth,
hiring, and consumption patterns to their portfolio companies.
Farmer says that the future of venture capital will be deter-
mined by data — the new oil in the venture landscape. “Most
firms are not designed to, nor will be able to scale — or cross
the chasm — the way we could. We are like an Uber when
other firms are trying to be good taxi companies. Or think of
how cloud computing changed the way we consumed technol-
ogy at scale, antiquating the client-server model.”
Similarly, Thomas Laffont, co-founder of Coatue Venture,
who came into Venture from the hedge fund world, says, “Data
are the future of business. It’s an architectural divide, and you
have to be on the right side.”3 Coatue has raised a $700 million
early stage fund and spends more than $30 million a year buying
data to feed its algorithms. It employs 40 data scientists and
engineers — about half the team that works on investments.
Though the investment universe gets hypercompetitive, it
demands creativity in sourcing, hustle, and youthful vigor.
Investing without a data-driven proactive approach is inef-
ficient, like shooting in the dark — you might see the target
outlines, but you can miss the bull’s-eye.
Google’s venture capital arm has also been down this data
driven path — it collects, collates, and analyzes data such as
timing of launch of the venture, past success record of found-
ers, and location of the venture, say, in tech hubs such as the
San Francisco Bay Area. “If you can’t measure and quantify it,
how can you hope to start working on a solution?” asked Bill
Maris, the former managing partner of Google Ventures. “We
have access to the world’s largest data sets you can imagine.
It would be foolish to just go out and make gut investments.”
Intuition still plays a role in the investment decision and can
sometimes overrule results suggested by data in such situa-
tions. “We would never make an investment in a founder we
thought was a jerk, even if all the data said this is an investment

-- 260 of 546 --

OVERVIEW: THE SOURCING PROCESS 	231
you should make,” says Bill. “We would make an investment
in a founder we really believed in, even if all the data said
we’re making a mistake. But it would give us pause.”4
The existing sourcing model, of working with entrepre-
neurs or trusted peer investors, brings about a steady stream
of qualitative and reliable opportunities. But it has restrictions,
say, to a geography or the size of your active network. Worse,
such approaches can be reactive, and you could land on the
opportunity when the round is almost done and be too late to
the game. Chris Farmer says that you not only have to see the
best opportunities but also win those effectively.
Other sources include incubators and accelerators, attor-
neys, angel networks, banks and nonbank financial institu-
tions, and technology transfer offices. Exhibit 20.1 depicts the
overall investment process, which commences with sourcing.
Exhibit 20.1 outlines these options in more detail.
Any top-tier firm sees anywhere from 2,000 to 10,000 oppor-
tunities each year, and after sifting through this enormous
pile, will invest in 10–15 companies. Studies conducted by
academic researchers show typical sourcing statistics (Exhib-
its 20.2 and 20.3). 5 Note that as many as 51 percent of opportu-
nities come from a mix of personal network and referrals.
Competing
to win an
allocation
Due
diligence,
negotiations,
and closing
Value
creation
and
monitoring
Exits
Sourcing and
screening
investment
opportunities
Exhibit 20.1 A venture fund’s investment process.

-- 261 of 546 --

232 	Sourcing inveStment opportunitieS
Exhibit 20.2 Sources of investment opportunity.
Source 	Advantages 	Disadvantages
Data-driven/
Proactive Sourcing
Preselected, highly targeted
opportunity set.
Timing of capital raise may be off, not all
data are publicly available so some
signals may get lost, or overstated.
Network/Peer investors 	Speedier due diligence in trusted
relationships.
Caveat emptor — struggling
opportunities can be upsold.
Accelerators and
incubators/demo-days
Large volume of vetted
opportunities. Best suited
for seed and early stage
investors.
Overcrowding — the best startups are
funded prior to demo-days. For some
startups, valuation can get inflated
very quickly.
Serial entrepreneurs 	Well-vetted ideas, better
understanding of investor
mind-set, recognition of
challenges.
May not have any skin in the game.
Business plan competitions
and venture forums
Prescreened and vetted, this
may be a good source of
opportunities for early-stage
investors.
Nonexclusive; watch for overshopped
companies.
University tech transfer
offices, federal
research labs
Diamond in the rough! May need
to invest time to build the
business strategy and team.
Watch for technology in search of an
application, or a hammer in search
of a nail.
Corporate spinouts 	Potential for joint development,
co-investments
Market size may be limited. Patents may
have limited shelf life.
Attorneys, accountants,
and consultants
Can provide some level of
prescreening based on fund
criteria and fit.
Lack of technical of business depth.
Banks/venture
debt providers
Can mitigate risk; may have skin
in the game.
Senior lenders have first lien on assets.
Opportunities considered =
200
Met with management
= 50
Partner level
review = 20
Due diligence
= 12
Offered
term
sheet =
6
Closed
4
Exhibit 20.3 Sourcing funnel.

-- 262 of 546 --

proActive Sourcing 	233
proActive Sourcing
Though cold calling might be the most painful part of any ana-
lyst’s job, it is now an essential mechanism to source opportu-
nities in hypercompetitive markets. “I had barely started, but
we were expected to cold call and source at least 25 opportu-
nities each month,” says an analyst at a leading Silicon Valley
multistage venture fund. Though some firms have found cold
calling to be tactically advantageous, others have relied pri-
marily upon their networks.
Though Exhibit 20.4 shows as many as 28 percent of
opportunities are proactively self-generated, most practition-
ers I talked to did not share stellar examples of opportuni-
ties sourced as a result of cold calls. I’m sure there are a few
winners here and there. Some complained that the process
is riddled with inefficiencies. In fact, many shrugged their
Personal
Network
31%
Proactively
self-generated
28%
Referrals by
investors
2%
Inbound from
company
1%
Referrals by
portfolio
company
8%
Quantitative
sourcing
2%
Sourcing Channels
Exhibit 20.4 Sourcing channels.
Source: Data from Gompers, Paul A., William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. “How Do Venture Capitalists
Make Decisions?” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22587, September 2016.

-- 263 of 546 --

234 	SOURCING INVESTmENT OPPORTUNITIES
shoulders, and one muttered, “I just need to make my quota
of calls . . . my senior partners say it is a rite of passage and
builds my character, but it’s just a waste of time and hurts our
brand. I know that if anything comes from it, it will be a stroke
of luck. CEOs ignore us, some laugh us off, and others ask us
to call back when the senior partner is on the line.” Not much
difference in the past 50 years — in 1962, Pitch Johnson and Bill
Draper put up all their personal savings, launched a partner-
ship, and hit the streets. “Pitch and I each leased a Pontiac and
went around and knocked on doors. And if it sounded like
ABC Electronics, then we’d go in, ask the president to sit down
and tell us, ‘What do you do?’ And they would ask, ‘Well,
what do you do?’ ‘Well, we are venture capital investors,’ we
would say.”6
But at times, a proactive approach can yield serious gold.
Kevin Efrusy of Accel Partners was ranked in the top five of
the Forbes Midas List of venture capital investors. After all, he
sourced this great investment opportunity called Facebook for
Accel Partners. Efrusy, who had served two separate stints as an
entrepreneur-in-residence at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers
(KPCB), had joined Accel with the primary directive — find the
next big thing in social startups. While Efrusy was on the hunt,
he found his target two years into his career at Accel. Chi-Hua
Chien, a graduate student doing research for Accel, pointed
out this opportunity called Facebook to Efrusy, who never
gave up until he trapped this elusive beast. “Social networks
had this dirty name,” he said in The Facebook Effect. 7 Facebook
had over 20 competitors when it was launched. Efrusy called
and e-mailed the startup relentlessly — and was stonewalled
or turned down. “We will move heaven and earth to make this
a successful company,” Efrusy once told Mark Zuckerberg.
But Facebook was not interested in talking to venture capital-
ists. “He was hounding us,” one Facebook executive would
recall. Finally, Efrusy decided to walk over to Facebook’s
offices and entered a chaotic scene, where remnants of the pre-
vious night’s liquor party were strewn all over. One person,
struggling to assemble a do-it-yourself (DIY) table, had blood
oozing from his forehead. Efrusy promised Zuckerberg, who

-- 264 of 546 --

PROACTIVE SOURCING 	235
was nibbling on a burrito, “Come to our partners’ meeting on
Monday. We’ll give you a term sheet by the end of the day, or
you’ll never hear from us again.” Over the weekend, Efrusy
did some intense calling around to find out more about the
Facebook phenomenon. On Monday morning at 10 a.m., Zuck-
erberg, wearing his flip-flops, shorts, and a T-shirt, showed up
at Accel’s offices with two cohorts. They didn’t bother bring-
ing any slides. Five days later, after much song and dance and
pleading, Accel had closed on a $12.7 million investment at a
$100 million pre-money valuation, owning a 15 percent stake
in Facebook. Efrusy did not get a board seat. “It hurt my feel-
ings,” he would say, “But I understand.”
Efrusy displays all attributes essential to source a good
investment opportunity: rapid assessment, proactive contact,
and a hunter-like tenacity. But it is not just Efrusy’s qualities
that count — the brand of the venture firm matters. James R.
Swartz, founder of Accel Partners, speaking prophetically of
investing in new technological waves, once said, “The older
generation . . . better just get the heck outta the way, or if you
want to stay in the game, get a kid and let him do his thing.”8
Little did Swartz know that this Efrusy kid was already at
work, sourcing the next big thing for Accel. Hany Nada,
cofounder of GGV, a venture fund boasting of investments in
Chinese giants like Alibaba, agrees. “I find that it is better to
bring in the newer generation — they understand emerging
technology trends better than I do.”
Sourcing requires hustle, especially in the ever-competitive
investment world. But what if you find a good company and
the round is closed? How can you creatively get in? When
Kevin Rose found out that mobile payments company Square
was raising a round, he reached out to Jack Dorsey, cofounder
of Square and Twitter. But the investment round was full, and
Jack politely declined, saying Square didn’t need any more
investors. Kevin noticed that Square did not have a video dem-
onstration of the product and quickly put together a video and
showed it to Jack. Impressed, Jack turned around and opened
up the supposedly full Series A round. 9

-- 265 of 546 --

236 	SOURCING INVESTmENT OPPORTUNITIES
Some VCs are proactively tapping into online founder-
investor matchmaking portals such as AngelList and Funders-
Club (which brands itself as an online VC). Such online
marketplaces are gaining traction and will change the land-
scape of investments eventually, but in the short run, online
portals offer insights to a decent pool of opportunities.
NETWORK-BASED SOURCING
In any business, it’s primarily relationships that matter. But in
the venture business, relationships can make or break a prac-
titioner. For the handful of venture firms that have established
brands, opportunities may arrive from a vast matrix of rela-
tionships: serial entrepreneurs, peer venture investors, attor-
neys, investment bankers, and service providers. Brad Feld
of the Foundry Group had a 15-year relationship with Mark
Pincus, the founder of Zynga. Feld and Union Square Ventures
led the first round of investment in this startup, and in four
years the company’s valuation was well over $5 billion. Or
consider Pierre Omidyar, founder of eBay. While seeking the
first round of capital, Omidyar had a term sheet that offered
Catch ’em Young — Dorm Room Fund
Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Dell, Napster — what do the
founders of these companies have in common? They all
started in a dorm room, their founders absconding from
their classrooms. And how do you source these opportuni-
ties? Enter the Dorm Room Fund, a venture fund backed by
First Round Capital, which is run by students for students.
The fund provides student entrepreneurs with seed capital
and mentorship right on their own campuses.
The Dorm Room Fund aims to be the first choice for stu-
dent entrepreneurs who need capital. Started in Philadel-
phia, the fund is now present in eight US-based universities
including Stanford, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), and Princeton.

-- 266 of 546 --

NETWORK-BASED SOURCING 	237
at least 2.5 times higher valuation, but he still chose to go with
lower valuation offered by Benchmark Capital. Pierre knew
Bruce Dunlieve, a general partner (GP) at Benchmark who had
invested in his prior company, and he trusted the relationship.
Thanks to the relationship advantage and gravitas, Benchmark
netted $2.5 billion on its $5 million eBay investment.10
Networks 	function 	well 	within 	certain 	geographies.
“Northern California is very network-centric, and it’s relatively
uncommon to find really high-quality investment opportuni-
ties in the straightforward way of going to conferences and
having people submit things on your website. The really good
deals go through a network because it’s an extremely well-
connected, low-friction community,” says William Elkus, man-
aging partner of Clearstone Venture Partners.
For the rest of venture practitioners, the sourcing process
is a lot of shoe-leather grunt work, often delegated to junior
analysts: attending industry conferences, reading various pub-
lications, and initiating contact with company executives to
build trust and initiate due diligence. One venture capitalist
(VC) had a picture on the wall, which bemoaned, “O, but how
many frogs should I kiss?”
Brent Ahrens of Canaan Partners summarizes: “This busi-
ness is about deal flow and cash flow — if you can generate
quality deal flow or raise cash from limited partners, you
are good.” 12
The business calls for the perpetual development of the
art of honing sourcing abilities. Regional venture conferences
When Opportunity Meets the Prepared Mind
One evening, Donald T. Valentine, founder of Sequoia Capital,
was dining at a restaurant when he saw Steve Jobs and Mike
Markkula together and sensed what was being discussed. He
dispatched a bottle of wine with a note: “Don’t lose sight of
the fact that I’m planning on investing in Apple.”
Valentine, who had introduced the two of them, invested
$150,000 shortly thereafter in Apple at a $3 million valuation.11

-- 267 of 546 --

238 	SOURCING INVESTmENT OPPORTUNITIES
blend company presentations with the wisdom of reputed
venture practitioners. Though it is rare to find truly novel
and groundbreaking opportunities at such events, this is fer-
tile ground for most venture practitioners. However, LPs are
seldom impressed to hear that your firm’s sourcing strategy
consists primarily of attending conferences. LPs often wish
to know whether you have any unfair advantage or competi-
tive threats in sourcing opportunities. Chris Douvos, who has
been a limited partner for over a decade, says, “Some of the
brand-name funds have a deep network, which is very hard
for new GPs to replicate. This network can be a significant
advantage — you can validate ideas, launch products, and
even engineer exits at the right time.”13
When a successful entrepreneur reaches out to you and
asks you to participate in his next big thing, you have arrived.
That sourcing advantage can be immense. As Chris Rizik says,
“What is it about you that acts as a magnet to entrepreneurs?
Dumb money is found aplenty, everywhere.” 14 As much as
the network matters in sourcing, networks take time to get
established. And there are disadvantages of relying too much
on others: the best opportunities are rarely shared. For those
starting fresh, often the best way to source a good opportunity
is get out there and start hunting. Accelerators, demo-days,
and angel networks are some good starting points to source
opportunities.
Sourcing Advantage: Treat Every Entrepreneur
with Respect
My best opportunity ever in my 30 years of investing expe-
rience came from an entrepreneur I had turned down. He
referred another entrepreneur to our fund, and we made
an investment that turned out to be our best performer
ever. I guess when we said no, we must have done it in a
thoughtful way.
— Jack Ahrens, TGap Ventures

-- 268 of 546 --

ACCELERATORS 	239
ACCELERATORS
Accelerators have sprung up in every corner of the world, and
they bring in mentorship, seed capital, networking opportuni-
ties, and access to future funding.
Two examples that stand out from the hundreds that oper-
ate out there are Silicon Valley-based Y Combinator (YC) and
global network Techstars. “About 11% of all Series A opportu-
nities come from accelerators,” says David Cohen, co-founder
of Techstars accelerator network. Techstars, launched by David
Cohen and VC Brad Feld in Boulder, Colorado, has expanded
globally (see Exhibit 20.5). Cohen, who has gone on to raise
four venture funds to invest in Techstars portfolio companies,
says, “We see so much that we have very strong pattern recog-
nition compared to any other VC.”
Exhibit 20.5 The Exponential Growth of Techstars.
2014 	2016 	2018
Number of annual programs 	14 	21 	38
Total companies 	505 	921 	1628
Capital raised by companies 	$1.2 bn 	$3.0 bn 	$6.4 bn
Portfolio market capitalization 	$5.1 bn 	$9.6 bn 	$18.9 bn
Techstars Accelerator — from a Concept to a Global
Network in a Decade
• 	Global Accelerator — started in 2007, and a decade
later it hosts 50 accelerator programs annually, each
funding 10 companies, in 32 cities in 16 countries.
• 	2,000 portfolio companies, adding 500 each year.
• 	1,000 startup weekends annually in 120 countries.
• 	$8 bn raised by the portfolio since inception. In 2019,
over $2 bn will be raised by the portfolio companies,
up from $1.5 bn in the previous year.
• 	80 percent companies are active, 10 percent were
acquired (>200 companies), and 10 percent failed.

-- 269 of 546 --

240 	SOURCING INVESTmENT OPPORTUNITIES
ANGEL NETWORKS
Fertile territories for opportunities for venture investors, angel
funds, and affiliated forms of seed capital provide an early
access to investment opportunities. Over 500 angel groups
exist worldwide, 15 nearly 300 of which are based in the United
States.16 Angel investor groups are composed of wealthy indi-
viduals or high-net-worth individuals who pool resources and
investment expertise. Angels typically target early-stage entre-
preneurs who need $100,000 to $1 million in equity financing.
Angel groups have limited cash resources for administration
and management. Before you build inroads to any angel inves-
tor network, consider the following:
• 	Understand the overall process and the strength of the network.
• 	Does the network have good opportunities in
the pipeline?
• 	How is the prescreening conducted? Who conducts
the due diligence?
• 	Does each angel invest one off on his or her own, or are
the investments pooled and negotiated as a group?17
• 	Are there standard terms of investment? What, if
any, sectors are preferred over others? Have the
angels made any follow-on investments?
• 	Have there been any up-rounds or syndications with
venture capitalists? Any exits?
• 	Limited bandwidth. Angels have limited resources to
invest, and an angel can lose interest fast after a few
investments turn into tax write-offs. A measure of activity
is the number of investments made in the past 12 months.
• 	Limited sector expertise. If an angel has expertise within a
certain sector, that’s a good start. Make sure you spend
time with those who have domain knowledge and can
share their experiences.
• 	Get to know the big dog. Every angel group has a big
dog — the center of this universe or the smartest guy
with the deepest pockets. The big dog is essential to the

-- 270 of 546 --

COmmERCIALIZING UNIVERSITY RESEARCH 	241
longevity and cohesion of a group: Many angels typi-
cally follow the investment rationale of a big dog. Big
dogs make a lot of investments and are astute in man-
aging their portfolios and risks. By the same token, be
wary of passive angels and tire kickers: many angels
sign up as members but are rarely active. For example,
65 percent of the memberships in angel groups are latent
angels, individuals who have the necessary net worth
yet have not made an investment. Either they are too
busy or just not interested or they are tire kickers, enter-
taining themselves at the cost of entrepreneurs. Avoid
these unconscionable devils at all costs.
• 	Standardized terms. Angel investment terms can be non-
standard. In one survey, 78 percent of VCs said the number
one reason that makes an angel-backed company unattractive
to VCs is overly high, unrealistic valuations. 58 percent of
the respondents said angels’ involvement had made a
company unattractive. Angels also complicate negotia-
tions and are viewed by venture capitalists as generally
unsophisticated.18 Opportunistic angels can stick an
entrepreneur with investment terms that hurt both par-
ties in the long run. In another study, it was evident that
angel funding was helpful in survival of a company per
se but was not central in whether a company obtained
follow-on financing.19 Despite this, at least 49 percent
of the venture capitalists coinvest with angels on most
opportunities. 20
• 	Quality of the portfolio: Are the investments progress-
ing toward an exit? The ultimate test of any investment
activity is future rounds from venture investors or, bet-
ter still, exits. Only 45 percent of angel groups had a co-
investment with venture capital firms.
COmmERCIALIZING UNIVERSITY RESEARCH
According to the Association of University Technology Manag-
ers (AUTM), academic technology transfer has created about
11,000 startups. 21 When it comes to mining universities, Robert

-- 271 of 546 --

242 	SOURCING INVESTmENT OPPORTUNITIES
“Bob” Nelsen of ARCH Venture Partners may have mastered
the art of sourcing opportunities within university labs. When
Bob met Mark Roth, a cellular biologist at the Fred Hutchin-
son Cancer Research Center, Mark was working on suspended
animation — a technique to induce a hibernation-like state
in animals by cutting off their oxygen supply. Most venture
capitalists would flee such a discussion. Not Bob, who worked
with Mark patiently for five years. Steven Lazarus, founder of
ARCH and now its managing director emeritus, would say of
ARCH’s investment strategy, “This was not seed capital. In our
case, we were identifying science literally at the site of incep-
tion, assessing whether it had commercial potential and then
erecting a commercial entity around it — it was virtually [start-
ing] from scratch.”22 As a result, Ikaria was formed with an ini-
tial investment from ARCH, Venrock, and 5AM Ventures. And
Mark Roth, the scientist who could have easily been passed
off as a mad scientist, went on to win the MacArthur Genius
Award after the company was launched.
Sourcing Advantage: How to Monetize University Startups
Osage University Partners has partnered with over 50 uni-
versities, essentially acquiring each university’s investment
participation rights. Universities often take anywhere from
2 percent to 10 percent equity in a startup. While a university
can maintain its participation rights by investing additional
capital at future rounds, it’s rare that technology transfer
offices actually exercise these rights. Quite simply, these are
not investment entities but rather are focused on commer-
cialization. Enter Osage. The partners at Osage built an index
of startups from 50 top-flight universities that had licensed
their technology to those startups but had not invested in
them. What they discovered startled them: There was a very
respectable 33 percent rate of return, which is better than
most VC funds have generated.23

-- 272 of 546 --

CORPORATE RESEARCH 	243
It is seldom the science that translates to opportunities — the
business talent is a critical component of the mix. Many
university 	startups 	flounder 	when 	founding 	teams 	lack
a healthy balance of business acumen, as well as a sense
of urgency.
Universities as a source of entrepreneurial talent are much
more fertile ground. When angel investor K. Ram Shriram
bumped into two young kids called Sergey and Larry in an
elevator at Stanford University, it was a chance meeting. Yet,
he went on to be the first one to invest $500,000, and the term,
“elevator pitch” was born. Sergey and Larry’s startup, Google,
catapulted K. Ram Shriram onto the list of Forbes billionaires.
CORPORATE RESEARCH
Research and development (R&D) spending by US companies
is at least four times that of university expenditures. In the
United States, the annual corporate annual R&D investments
are well above $300 billion. According to Booz & Company,
a consulting firm, the top 1,000 companies invest $500 billion
each year globally.24
While these territories may seem fertile, most R&D invest-
ments occur to further productivity and profitability. Corpora-
tions have little expertise or motivation in spinning startups
that eventually become venture backed. As such, corpora-
tions have a reason to be threatened by startups. Rather than
promote startups, corporations tend to relinquish rights to a
valuable IP.
Xerox is one example that comes up often, in view of miss-
ing the opportunity on the graphical user interface (GUI),
which was monetized by Apple. To that point, it was Bill Gates,
founder of Microsoft, who once famously called on Steve Jobs,
“Hey Steve, just because you broke into Xerox’s store before
I did and took the TV doesn’t mean I can’t go in later and steal
the stereo.” 25

-- 273 of 546 --

244 	SOURCING INVESTmENT OPPORTUNITIES
A similar example of a missed opportunity originates
from the merger of Pharmacia and Upjohn, two pharmaceuti-
cal giants. After the merger of Pharmacia and Upjohn, David
Scheer, an entrepreneur and investor who blended his knowl-
edge of science and venture capital, was hired to scour some
back-burner projects for potential development or divestiture.
A compound caught David’s attention. “Apo-I Milano pro-
tein was the most interesting,” Scheer recalls. “We had vision
that this project deserved a platform as the next frontier in the
cardiovascular arena.”26 Scheer partnered with Roger New-
ton, the co-discoverer of Lipitor, the world’s most successful
cardiovascular drug, and launched Esperion Therapeutics.
Esperion went public in five years and was acquired by Pfizer
for $1.3 billion. In the biotech sector, spinout activities have
occurred more frequently as compared to other sectors. While
larger companies are sources of talent and know-how, limited
startup and venture activity of merit has evolved from larger
companies. In select cases, and especially in the pharmaceuti-
cal sector, corporations can be a rich source of opportunities.
TRADE CONFERENCES
Trade conferences, where the cutting edge of developments
can be seen, are often rich sources of opportunities for seeking
investments. Trade shows can be an ideal place to seek invest-
ments. Investors often go to a conference and engage with
business unit heads and the geeks to gather data and informa-
tion. Such shows act as a fabric between the worlds of inves-
tors, entrepreneurs, and large company executives. Arthur
Rock, one of the early investors in Apple, once went to a com-
puter show in San Jose when nobody really had a computer
to show, but rather had parts of computers. And while other
booths were empty, there was a long line at the Apple booth.
Arthur, who invested in Apple subsequently would recall,
“Jesus, there’s got to be something here.”27
Leading investors walk the halls of trade shows to assess
industry trends and direction, meet with the technical thought

-- 274 of 546 --

TRADE CONFERENCES 	245
leaders, and explore investment opportunities. Startups that
may have achieved a certain stature or size are often exhibiting
their wares at industry trade shows.
At times, it may just be a serial entrepreneur wandering
these halls, looking for his next new thing. That’s how William
Draper III came across LSI Logic, a semiconductor company.
Wilfred Corrigan, then CEO of Fairchild Semiconductor, was
itching to do something new. He met with Draper at a conven-
tion and expressed his desire to start a new company. Draper
invested, and LSI Logic went public two years later. At the
time, NASDAQ billed it as the largest technology IPO.28
“A combination of factors is at play — attending confer-
ences, listening to the keynote speakers present new ideas, and
looking at the new products helps us to understand the prob-
lems these smart people are trying to solve. We take that into
consideration and try to define what really makes sense for us
to invest in,” says Lip-Bu Tan of Walden International. “Ideally,
for a new market, there are no conferences. We find many of
our most interesting opportunities in tiny conferences, where
there are 30 or 40 vendors, and we’re the only VC firm that’s at
the conference,” says one Sand Hill Road investor.29
But while attending conferences is one way of seeking
opportunities, Tim O’Reilly, who organized such conferences
frequently, had a head start in sourcing when he partnered
with Bryce Roberts to raise a venture fund. “Tim is one of those
rare businesspeople who not only takes the longest and broad-
est possible view,” the Linux Journal wrote of Tim O’Reilly,
who launched a series of publications and conferences around
technology and innovation.30 After hosting O’Reilly Media’s
first Open Source event, O’Reilly garnered national publicity
and since has held summits on peer-to-peer technology, web
services, geek volunteerism, and Ajax. These summits forge
new ties between industry leaders, raise awareness of technol-
ogy issues, and crystallize the critical issues around emerg-
ing technologies. And of course, they are a fertile ground for
investment opportunities. O’Reilly Media describes itself as “a
chronicler and catalyst of leading-edge development, homing
in on the technology trends that really matter and galvanizing

-- 275 of 546 --

246 	SOURCING INVESTmENT OPPORTUNITIES
their adoption by amplifying ‘faint signals’ from the alpha
geeks who are creating the future.”31 LP Chris Douvos says,
“Tim is the Obi-Wan Kenobi of the tech space . . . a great ecosys-
tem exists around him and entrepreneurs are attracted to this
guru and the ecosystem.” 32 So when Tim and Bryce Roberts
decided to raise a fund, O’Reilly Alphatec Ventures (OATV),
Chris jumped in with both feet and invested. OATV has a sig-
nificant sourcing advantage, a first look at many new opportu-
nities even before they become opportunities.
Practitioners can benefit from conferences primarily via
gathering industry trends and interacting with thought leaders.
Consider these as educational sessions. Every now and then,
an opportunity might pop up that will merit an investment.
INVESTOR PITCH SESSIONS
Equivalent to a beauty pageant, entrepreneurs walk the ramp
in 10 minutes or less, the VCs show the scorecard of a 5 or an
8 (“Never a 10, one VC told me — that would mean I would
be hounded by the entrepreneur”), and the audience claps
and moves on to the next pitch. As the pitches roll by, the VCs
offer their feedback. “Sounds like a Swiss knife,” they say to
one idea. A Swiss knife is a technology with 23 or more fea-
tures, very difficult to manufacture, and in VC jargon trans-
lates to “you are trying to do too much — let’s get focused
here.” Entrepreneurs who could barely scratch the surface in
two minutes, protest, “I have a lot more to say here . . .” but are
gently ushered along into the Q-and-A session. “I applaud you
for trying to change the world,” says one VC. Ninety minutes
later, the VC panel having shared its observations, the entre-
preneurs leave the room with lots of advice and no cash. But
for practitioners across the country, such events are a tactical
mechanism of looking at opportunities. For entrepreneurs, this
presents an opportunity to meet and pitch a VC, albeit under
pressure. Any practitioner worth his or her expertise or money
is invited to participate on such panels, where entrepreneurs
seek attention and capital, not necessarily in equal parts. And

-- 276 of 546 --

INVESTOR PITCH SESSIONS 	247
then there are entrepreneurs who will stop at nothing at such
events to get a VC’s attention. “Someone started to whisper in
my ear at a urinal — bad idea!” says Rick Heitzmann of First-
Mark Capital.33
These events offer prescreened opportunities to investors
who may choose to follow up after these events and dig deeper
into the investment thesis. Ask Rajeev Batra of the Mayfield
Fund, who was featured on a panel called “Hand us the next
killer Cloud app, and we will hand you $100,000.” Forty com-
panies were invited to present to a VC panel, with leading
practitioners from firms like Sequoia Capital and Bessemer
Venture Partners. Such pitch sessions are ideal opportunities
to screen and possibly land the next big thing.
For business school students across the country, participat-
ing in and winning a business plan competition is a badge of
honor. Some students have found these to help make some
pocket change on the side. Several startups have been funded
and launched successfully — thanks to such competitions.
When 	Jayant 	Kulkarni 	and Adam 	Regelman 	started
Quartzy, a company dedicated to solving inventory manage-
ment solutions for scientific laboratories, they participated in
the Olin Cup — a business plan competition at Washington
University at St. Louis. After winning the competition, they
attracted two term sheets and closed a seed round shortly
thereafter. Quartzy went on to win another business plan com-
petition in New York City, and was accepted at Y Combina-
tor. The company closed its Series A investment, led by Keith
Rabois of Khosla Ventures.
For Scott Hanson, founder and CEO of Ambiq Micro, win-
ning the DFJ-Cisco business plan competition was a pleasant
surprise. Scott had just beaten 16 teams from around the world
to win a $250,000 seed investment. Six months after the award
was announced, Ambiq raised a $2.4 million round led by DFJ
Mercury to develop the next generation of energy-efficient
microcontrollers. Reducing energy consumption in phones,
computers, and other computing devices by a factor of 5–10
times tipped the scale in his favor. Todd Dagres of Spark Capi-
tal found his Akamai — an IPO opportunity when he was

-- 277 of 546 --

248 	SOURCING INVESTmENT OPPORTUNITIES
mentoring a team at the MIT competition. Dagres, who was
then at Battery Ventures, invested in Akamai, which subse-
quently went public.
THE AGONY OF mISSED OPPORTUNITIES
As successful as some of these venture capitalists may be,
every investor misses a few good opportunities. Menlo Ven-
tures invested in Uber but missed Facebook. Venky Ganesan
of Menlo Ventures recalls, “When Sean Parker said, ‘Venky
I’m going to Boston to meet this young college student who
wants to start a site focused on connecting college students
with each other. It’s called The Facebook. Would you like to
meet the guy?’ I said, ‘Wait, college student . . . dropped out of
Harvard . . . site aimed at college students, that thing is never
going to make money.’ I remember that moment every day.”34
First Round Capital Loses Some and Gains Some:
Twitter and Square
Evan Williams (co-founder of Twitter) was working on this
thing, T-w-t-t-r. He could not afford the domain with the
vowels! We offered them a term sheet — $500,000 at a $5 mil-
lion premoney valuation, meaning his firm would hold a 10
percent stake in the company. Evan continued to fund it, and
three months later, Union Square Ventures led the round at a
$20 million valuation. It was four times the price First Round
had offered. We could have participated but passed.
That led to one of spectacular success. Jack Dorsey was
starting Square, and I told him “Dude you got to let me
redeem myself,” and over dinner Jack said, “You thought
that was expensive?” Josh agreed to the valuation promptly
this time, a number much more higher than $20 million. “No
problem, we are in,” and Square turned out to be a spectacu-
lar success for First Round Capital.35
—Josh Koppelman, First Round Capital

-- 278 of 546 --

THE AGONY OF mISSED OPPORTUNITIES 	249
Bessemer Venture Partners has created the anti-portfolio
showcasing their missed opportunities. The Bessemer anti-
portfolio lists the investment opportunities that the firm
missed — one of the few venture firms to make light of its
opportunities lost, which include Google, Apple, and other
legendary barn-burner investment opportunities.36
OVP Venture Partners, a venture firm based in Portland,
Oregon, missed its opportunity to invest in Amazon.com. “If
you are in this business long enough, you’ll see some great
deals walk through your door. If you are in this business long
enough, you’ll show some great deals the door. We try to limit
our self-flagellation to one deal per fund.”37 OVP’s Gerry
Langeler suggests that “it takes a certain personality, one that
many venture firms lack, to publicize your fallibility. . . . It indi-
cates you’re not some stuffy, highfalutin’ group that’s going to
lord over your entrepreneurs,” Langeler writes. “Business is
fun. . . . you may not be able to laugh on most days, but if you
can’t laugh, find another line of work.” And for the limited
partners who invest in OVP, such acts build “credibility that
comes from candor and self-disclosure.” 38
Legendary investor Warren Buffett admired Bob Noyce, co-
founder of Fairchild Semiconductor and Intel. Buffett passed
on Intel, one of the greatest investing opportunities of his life
as he seemed “comfortably antiquated” when it came to new
technology companies and had a long-standing bias against
technology investments.39
Peter O. Crisp of Venrock missed one, too. One “small
company in Rochester, New York, came to us, and one of our
junior guys saw no future [for] this product . . . that company,
Haloid, became Xerox.” Venrock also passed on Tandem
Computers, Compaq, and Amgen.40 ARCH Venture Partners
missed Netscape — that little project Marc Andreessen started
at the University of Chicago. An opportunity that, according
to Steven Lazarus, would have been worth billions! “We just
never knocked at the right door,” he would say. Eventually,
ARCH decided to hire a full-time person to just keep tabs on
technology coming out of the universities to “make certain we
don’t miss that door next time.”41

-- 279 of 546 --

250 	SOURCING INVESTmENT OPPORTUNITIES
KPCB missed an opportunity to invest in VMWare42 because
the valuation was too high: a mistake, according to John Doerr.
Draper Fisher Jurvetson (DFJ) was initially willing but even-
tually passed on Facebook, as the firm believed the valuation
was too high at $100 million pre-money. 43 KPCB, not wanting
to be left out of a hot opportunity like Facebook, invested $38
million at a $52 billion valuation. 44
Tim Draper of DFJ, who earned his stripes with opportuni-
ties like Baidu (the Chinese version of Google), turned down
Google “because we already had six search engines in our
portfolio.” Several leading valley firms like NEA and KPCB
invested in Fisker Automotive, which consumed over $1 bil-
lion and teetered on bankruptcy. DFJ backed its competitor
Tesla Motors, which did spectacularly well. DFJ missed Face-
book but made it nicely on Tesla.
Angel investor K. Ram Shriram almost missed his oppor-
tunity to invest in Google when he turned the founders away.
“I told Sergey and Larry that the time for search engines has
come and gone. But I am happy to introduce you to all the oth-
ers who may want to buy your technology.”45 But six months
later, noticing an interesting pattern, Ram K. Shriram invested
$500,000 as one of its first angel investors.
Steve Jobs used to work at Atari before he started Apple,
and he made an offer to Nolan Bushnell (founder of Atari).
Bushnell would recall “I turned down one-third of Apple Com-
puter for $50,000.”46 Tom Perkins of Kleiner Perkins Caufield &
Byers (KPCB) would have the same grief, “We turned down
Apple Computer. No — We didn’t. We didn’t even turn it
down. We didn’t agree to meet with Jobs and Steve Wozniak.”
Bill Draper too missed investing in Apple. “I sent my part-
ner down to look at Apple. He came back and he said, “Guy
kept me waiting for an hour, and he’s very arrogant.” And,
of course, that’s Steve Jobs! I said, “Well, let’s let it go.” That
was a big mistake. But Donald T. Valentine of Sequoia Capital
snagged Apple, “I went to Steve’s house. And we talked, and
I was convinced it was a big market . . . just embryonic in the
beginning. Steve was in his Fu Manchu look, and his question
for me was, ‘Tell me what I have to do to have you finance me.’”

-- 280 of 546 --

THE AGONY OF mISSED OPPORTUNITIES 	251
Valentine responded, “We have to have someone in the com-
pany who has some sense of management and marketing and
channels of distribution. Jobs said “‘Fine. Send me three people.’
So I sent him three candidates. One he didn’t like. One didn’t
like him. And the third one was Mike Markkula,” recalls
Valentine.47 Markkula ended up investing in Apple and work-
ing alongside Steve Jobs. Valentine had added value to the
fledgling company even before he invested.
Be in this game long enough and you will have your own
share of misses. But it’s the hits that matter, and sourcing is a
critical component of that hit–miss ratio. LPs are eager to find
out if you have any unfair advantage in sourcing opportuni-
ties. When capital is available aplenty everywhere, why would
entrepreneurs call you?
Target the right sourcing arenas. If you are not fishing in
the right pond, as Warren Buffett says, you could end up with
a lot of frogs in your portfolio. Any GP needs to ask, “Can I
find an opportunity that can grow or generate 10X within my
investment horizon?”
If your networks are thin, you will attract subpar opportu-
nities. “The ability to attract the best opportunities is closely
tied to a brand — the aura of the venture firm, which is a
byproduct of historic performance. You originate deals based
upon the reputation of the firm — that’s recursive. The better
deals you’ve done, the better your reputation and the easier
it is to find people willing to approach you. The reputation of
your firm depends upon your success in marketing, but more
important, it fundamentally depends upon the quality of the
people. It’s a complex set of dynamic variables,” says William
Elkus of Clearstone Venture Partners.
Proprietary relationships is a tired and overused term found
in every fund document. LPs abhor it. Use it at your own risk.
Good practitioners track sources of good opportunities
systematically. This effort seems painful at first, yet can be
rewarding in the long run. A sourcing pipeline is not substan-
tially different from any sales pipeline — if it is thin, you will
be in trouble, sooner or later. Tracking tools also help to peri-
odically assess the forest, the patterns of missed opportunities,

-- 281 of 546 --

252 	SOURCING INVESTmENT OPPORTUNITIES
strong sources, relationship dynamics. and more. In the world
where data and analytics are at the core of decision-making,
such a tool becomes imperative.
The opportunities you attract are an indicator of your
brand, network, and strategy. Building your personal brand is
equally important as is that of the venture firm. As Goldman
Sachs’s eighth commandment goes, “Important people like to
deal with other important people. Are you one?”48
As we will see in the following chapters, sourcing is only a
small part of the puzzle. Negotiating terms and closing in on
the investment are equally important. As one GP quipped, “If
sourcing was like dating, closing the investment is like a mar-
riage — it is a commitment.”

-- 282 of 546 --

Part Three
253
And now begins the fun part — investing.
One newly minted VC told me that he felt like a kid in a
candy shop of quantum computing, the decentralization of
power and blockchains, the brave new world of AI, the longev-
ity with CRISPR and gene editing, space travel, mars coloniza-
tion, the gig economy . . . . these waves keep coming at you. The
same VC broke his tibia — the longest bone in your body that
connects the knee to the ankle — while trying to romp on the
beaches of Hawaii. So how do you avoid breaking your bones
while being in a state of rapture of technology waves com-
ing at you?
This section looks at the nuances of sourcing opportuni-
ties — which is much harder for newcomers and an embar-
rassment of riches for the established firms. We are paid to be
good stock pickers, so building a portfolio calls for the hunt-
er’s mind-set — first find the best ones. There is some degree
of luck involved here, so stay open and loose — be kind; wel-
come them all. Any portfolio is a mix of proactive and reac-
tive — what you hunt for, and what comes in the door.
Building Your
Portfolio

-- 283 of 546 --

254 	PART THREE 	Building YouR PoRTfolio
Once you engage, it’s the swift skill of analysis — how will
this opportunity change the world, and shape your returns?
Does this management team exhibit business, technology, and
strategic thinking — a winner’s mind-set, charm to attract
resources, tenacity to cross chasms and slay dragons? And
then, the closing — this is where you agree on terms, shake
hands, and open that bottle of vino at the closing dinner. In
this competitive world of select opportunities, you will win
some and lose some. But that’s the nature of the game. The big-
ger questions remain — do you overpay to win? How do you
know which ones will play out in the long run?
How can you diligence the spirit of a man? Who wins —
who fails and what breaks one down and makes them back
up. And are people merely to be treated as “money-making
machines” or something more? If founders fail, do you aban-
don them? Or do you attend to them? Let me leave you with a
line from poet Gwendolyn Brooks:
“We are each other’s harvest;
we are each other’s business;
we are each other’s magnitude and bond.”

-- 284 of 546 --

21
255
The only measure of venture capital success is performance. The
ability to pick the right companies that generate superior returns
is paramount to any professional’s success in this business.
The investment process — sourcing, due diligence, nego-
tiation of investment terms, board roles, and supporting
entrepreneurs — is important, yet secondary. Investors primar-
ily care about strong financial returns. While sourcing invest-
ment opportunities is a function of the firm’s team expertise and
relationships, the venture firm’s brand as being entrepreneur
friendly has also become an important factor. Investors, who are
independent and act decisively, are responsive and treat entre-
preneurs as equals attract strong opportunities. Eventually, a
strong brand is built on this foundation.
When it comes to due diligence, seasoned investors are
students of the market; they make quick decisions and actively
invest in opportunities that serve the market needs. Manage-
ment team, product, features, and competition are important
attributes, yet the best investors rarely overthink and are com-
fortable in ambiguity.
These five general criteria determine investment decisions:
1. Does the management team demonstrate integrity,
a sense of urgency, knowledge, and agility?
2. Is a clear market pain point identified? Has a value
proposition been established?
Due Diligence
Cheat Sheet

-- 285 of 546 --

256 	Due Diligence cheat Sheet
Exhibit 21.1 Due Diligence — Key Criteria.
Criteria 	Definition 	Remarks
Management Team Criteria
Management team 	Stage-ready and
well-rounded team,
committed and
coachable.
Company should have attracted a strong team with
clarity on skills for sales and marketing and
product development. Though each company
has specific needs for talent, look for the
individuals, their backgrounds, and a fit with
their roles.
Operational systems 	Financial, sales, and
operations systems
are documented and
managed effectively.
Company should demonstrate adequate internal
systems such as (a) financial reporting, controls,
and decision-making, (b) sales and marketing
systems, (c) product development road maps.
Overall milestones 	On plan to meet its
milestones. No material
change in its business
strategy or direction.
Review company’s product road maps and assess
with the quarterly reports and actual progress.
Though deviations are a norm, ensure that
the company is on or ahead of plan prior to
considering follow-on funding.
Reporting and
communication
with investors
Monthly, quarterly reports
are provided in a timely
manner. Verbal updates
or meetings are frequent.
Company’s ability to keep investors updated on key
developments via reports, communications, and
updates is important.
Financials
Revenues 	On plan or exceeding plan. 	Review financial milestones of revenues and gross
margins. Stability of margins will be reviewed.
These will be assessed in conjunction with other
balance sheet- and cash flow-related matters to
ensure the financial stability of the company.
Other 	No significant debt or
receivables; cash flows
are sufficient.
Investment Terms
Size of round 	Sufficient to help company
reach the next milestone
Investment will be syndicated as a part of a larger
round. Is this capital sufficient for meeting the
stated milestones?
Position 	Co-investor or follower 	Syndicate follow-on investments with external
investors as a mechanism to validate risk
mitigation.
Terms of investment 	Case-by-case basis 	Ensure that current terms of investment are suitable
to ensure target returns.
Additional capital needs Future capital needs
and path to break-
even are clear
Investment may be ideally suited in situations where
companies demonstrate capital efficiency. If
companies need substantial follow-on rounds,
these would elevate the risk.
Risk Mitigation
Syndicate investors 	Additional investments from
current investors or new
investors.
Assess various factors of risk mitigation such as
(a) professional investment from venture funds
at up-rounds, (b) growing demand of products/
pipeline of orders, (c) diversity of customer base.
	Purchase order pipeline 	A meaningful pipeline of
orders is at hand.

-- 286 of 546 --

Due Diligence cheat Sheet 	257
3. What are key risks and a plan for mitigation?
4. Are capital needs, efficiency, and break-even taken
into account?
5. Can this investment generate target returns within the
desired time frame?
Exhibit 21.1 describes the various criteria in greater detail
for investment consideration. Not all of these criteria are
applicable to early-stage companies.
While conducting diligence, good practitioners are weary
of time and do not overthink a good opportunity or analyze
it to death. This is especially important at the seed stage. Mike
Maples of Floodgate Fund has invested in some of the leading
technology startups in Silicon Valley. He says, “The best deals we
have done are the ones where we decided the quickest — which
is counterintuitive to me. Ten minutes into a meeting with an
entrepreneur, I stopped the presentation, raised my hand, and
said I want to invest. The company had momentum, an authen-
tic entrepreneur, and an awesome market.”1

-- 287 of 546 --



-- 288 of 546 --

22
259
Due 	diligence 	is 	the 	art 	of 	sizing 	up 	an 	investment
opportunity — its potential outcomes and major risk factors.
A good opportunity tests the limits of our observations and
experiences, even the limits of our networks and imagination.
Identifying the potential for value creation and estimating
its sustained advantage is the heart of any due diligence activ-
ity. Mitch Lasky of Benchmark Capital says, “I almost hesi-
tate to use the word due diligence because it implies a certain
methodical rigor — rather we ask, what are attributes of suc-
cessful venture investments.” Investors primarily focus on the
two primary attributes:
• 	Management. Do the CEO and the leadership team have
a sparkle, a sense of enthusiasm, penetrating intel-
ligence, and courage? Even if they have not done it
before, these qualities are essential. Is there a glimmer
of greatness?
• 	Market. Does this opportunity have the potential for
creating outsized returns? Is the market ready for
this product?
Early-stage 	investors 	seldom 	start 	with 	valuation 	or
financial projections. Though it is important to understand
financial budgets and capital needed to accomplish major
milestones in the next two years, far-out, “five-year” projec-
tions or exit multiples are useless artifacts. The two major
Diligence

-- 289 of 546 --

260 	Diligence
criteria — management and markets — trump the rest of the
diligence criteria by orders of magnitude. Warren Buffett sum-
marizes his due diligence process with four simple criteria:1
1. Can I understand it? Buffett defines “understanding a busi-
ness” as “having a reasonable probability of being able to
assess where the company will be in 10 years.” 2
2. Does it look like it has some kind of sustainable competitive
advantage?
3. Is the management composed of able and honest people?
4. Is the price right?
If it passes all four filters, Buffett writes a check.
Peter Thiel says, “Great companies do three things. First,
they create value. Second, they are lasting or permanent in
a meaningful way. Finally, they capture at least some of the
value they create.” 3 According to Thiel, durable startups
create something new, or go from 0 to 1, instead of replicat-
ing an existing model, or going from 1 to n. His views on
playing in markets where no competition exists are well
documented in his book Zero to One where he asks critical
questions: Have you identified a unique opportunity that
others don’t see? Do you have a way to not just create but
deliver your product?
Once a novel idea has been launched, the goal is to monop-
olize quickly and, eventually, spread that monopoly into other
parallel domains. In Exhibit 22.1, we see the results of a survey
showing various criteria that come into effect when selecting
investments. The quality of the management team is often the
number one criteria in making investment decisions.

-- 290 of 546 --

THe cHecKliST MAniFeSTO 	261
THe cHecKliST MAniFeSTO
“Every man takes the limits of his own field of vision for the
limits of the world,” wrote Arthur Schopenhauer. And often,
we find that our own limits can bring about financial failures,
or missed opportunities.
A diligence checklist ensures that critical diligence areas are
addressed efficiently, in times when transaction speed is critical.
(See Exhibit 22.2 for sample diligence checklist.) Prior to take-
off, airline pilots are expected to follow a methodical check-
list. Boeing Corporation introduced checklists in 1935, after a
prototype plane crashed, killing two pilots who had forgotten
to disengage a critical lock. In a parked aircraft, wind gusts
can damage control components. A “gust lock” is engaged to
prevent movement of various parts, such as ailerons and tail
fins. The fatal crash introduced the concept of preflight check-
lists — a procedure to ensure such errors do not occur.
1%
2%
6%
8%
10%
13%
14%
47%
0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50
Valuation
Ability to add value
Industry Sector
Market
Business Model
Product
Fit
Team
Exhibit 22.1 Most important factors for selecting investments.
Source: Data from Gompers, Paul A., William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. “How Do Venture Capitalists
Make Decisions?” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22587.

-- 291 of 546 --

262 	Diligence
Exhibit 22.2 Due Diligence Checklist.
Criteria 	Description
Management 	The key team member(s) have the expertise and skills needed to run this type
of business. Is there clarity on additional hires and timing of recruitment?
What are the significant holes in the team?
Customers, revenue, and
business model
The customer value proposition is quantifiable, high, and recognizable. The
market need is established, and the customer has an urgency to act. The
product price points are identified, along with gross margins and costs.
Market size 	The current target and addressable market size is estimated. It is a large and
growing market, quantifiable to a certain degree.
Product or service 	The product or service is described succinctly as the stage of
development — prototype, first customer, multiple customers — is
identified. A development road map is included.
Competitors and
competitive advantage
The product or service is better than the competition based on features and/
or price. Is current and future competition identified and evaluated for
weakness or significant barriers?
Capital efficiency and
value creation
A reasonable milestone event chart with value drivers, dates, and capital needs
is identified.
Financials 	Are plans based on realistic assumptions with reasonable returns? Does it
contain reasonable, justifiable projections for two to three years with
assumptions explained?
Exit assumptions 	Is there a reasonable exit time frame? Is there some clarity on the target
universe of buyers?
Importance of Checklists: Specialized Ability
and Group Collaboration
The volume and complexity of what we know has exceeded
our individual ability to deliver its benefits correctly, safely,
or reliably, writes surgeon and author Atul Gawande.
The checklist routine “requires balancing a number of vir-
tues: freedom and discipline, craft and protocol, specialized
ability and group collaboration. And for checklists to help
achieve that balance, they have to take two almost opposing
forms. They supply a set of checks to ensure the stupid but
critical stuff is not overlooked, and they supply another set
of checks to ensure people talk and coordinate and accept
responsibility while nonetheless being left the power to man-
age the nuances and unpredictabilities . . . .”
— The Checklist Manifesto, by Atul Gawande

-- 292 of 546 --

TAilORing Diligence BY STAge 	263
TAilORing Diligence BY STAge
As stage and sectors of companies evolve, diligence needs to
be tailored accordingly.
As seen in Exhibit 22.3, practitioners can focus on the most
important criteria of due diligence by stage of the investment
opportunity. It is pointless dissecting detailed financials for
a seed stage company. Investor and author Nassim Nicholas
Taleb reminds us that intelligence is not about noticing things
that are relevant (detecting patterns); but “in a complex world, intel-
ligence consists in ignoring things that are irrelevant (avoiding false
patterns).”4
Exhibit 22.3 Key Due Diligence Questions for Consideration by Stage.
Seed Stage 	Early Stage 	Growth Stage
Management 	What is the founder’s
expertise and
understanding of the
market pain?
Does management have
the ability to let go and
attract smarter people at
the right time?
Based on market
needs, can the
management team
take a prototype and
develop a commercial
product? Technology
development? Sales?
Financial?
Can the team achieve high
growth, high margins?
Explore geographic
expansion? Manage
resources — people
and cash — effectively?
What are the
board dynamics?
Market 	Is there a need in the
market? Is it a growing
market? Will the market
expand to accommodate
breakthrough products?
Gauge the ability to
cross the chasm from
early adopters to
mainstream market.
Competitive pressures.
Technology 	IP assessment.
Freedom to operate.
Laboratory scale data.
Can you make it once?
What are the features
and alignment with
market needs?
What are the market/
customer level data?
Can you make it
many times?
Look at deployment and
operational efficiencies.
Can you make it
consistently, with
high quality, while
maintaining costs?
Financials 	12- to 24-month milestones
and capital needed to
reach value creation.
What is the test pricing
and what are the
revenue assumptions,
growth rates projected,
and gross margins?
Sustained revenue growth,
margin stability/erosion.
Ability to improve
gross margins is often
over-emphasized.
Detailed financial
analysis of past
(1) income statement,
(2) balance sheet, and
(3) cash flows.

-- 293 of 546 --

264 	Diligence
Elements of Enduring Companies: Sequoia Capital’s View
Starting a business is rough. Most startups fail. A founder’s
best chance to thrive is to find the right community, the right
partners, and the right network of support from the very
beginning. We love nothing more than meeting promising
founders during their first days starting a company.
The tech giants of today started as one- or two-person
ideas not long ago. We’ve met many young companies and
noticed that startups with the following characteristics have
the best shot of becoming enduring companies:
Clarity of purpose. Summarize the company’s business
on the back of a business card.
Large markets. Address existing markets poised for rapid
growth or change. A market on the path to a $1B potential
allows for error and time for real margins to develop.
Rich customers. Target customers who will move fast
and pay a premium for a unique offering.
Focus. Customers will only buy a simple product with a
singular value proposition.
Pain killers. Pick the one thing that is of burning impor-
tance to the customer, then delight them with a compel-
ling solution.
Thinking differently. Constantly challenge conventional
wisdom. Take the contrarian route. Create novel solutions.
Outwit the competition.
Team DNA. A company’s DNA is set in the first 90 days.
Choose your first few hires wisely.
Agility. Stealth and speed can beat slow incumbents.
Resilience. Hone your ability to bounce back and
keep trying.
Frugality. Focus spending on what’s critical. Spend only
on the priorities and maximize profitability.
Inferno. Start with only a little money. It forces disci-
pline and focus. A huge market with customers yearning for
a product developed by great engineers requires very little
firepower.

-- 294 of 546 --

cHecKliSTS — USeFUl BUT SelDOM USeD 	265
Besides tailored diligence, the process matters as well.
An investor needs to conduct diligence in a timely, efficient,
and respectful manner. Most indecisive VCs drag the process
along, often trying to justify their own lack of conviction. Spin-
ning the founders in a perpetual orbit cannot “diligence the
risk out.” Igor Taber spent 10 years as an investor with Intel
Capital before he switched over to the operating side, “I did
not recognize how I was interpreted as an investor. The intent
and the communication can be misinterpreted easily. I am a
hundred times more cautious in the way I engage now,” he
says. “This operating role has brought in a deeper empathy for
founders.”
cHecKliSTS — USeFUl BUT SelDOM USeD
As much as the importance of checklists can be emphasized,
it is harder to put it in practice. Laziness, bias, and inflated
self-confidence often play in our business. The first airplane
crash fatality occurred in 1935, and despite putting checklists
in place, at least six similar aircraft accidents have occurred
since — the most recent almost 80 years later in 2014. Following
the most recent crash, the US National Transportation Safety
Board (NTSB) urged a study. The study, conducted by the
National Business Aviation Association (NBAA), revealed that
over a three-year period, about 25,876 business aviation flights
(or 18 percent) failed to conduct a complete pre-take-off check
of flight controls. As many as 2,875 flights began without a full,
valid check5
. If you are a successful VC, you might fly private
(or at least have a NetJets subscription), so bear these statis-
tics in mind. Pilots do not follow checklists consistently, and
people die. So how unlikely is it that VCs will follow diligence
checklists consistently? After all, it’s only LPs’ money — it’s
not like people die when an investment fails. Yet the eternal
optimist in me hopes that such checklists can become the norm
and save us from our foibles.
Though checklists can bring rigor and discipline, some
investors tend to follow these formulaic approaches somewhat

-- 295 of 546 --

266 	Diligence
mindlessly, checking boxes and overloading founders with
inane requests for irrelevant information. Some due diligence
meetings are akin to VC overlords in a “power-play” mode
grilling entrepreneurs with all and sundry.
The Socratic Method of Conducting Due Diligence
How would the Greek philosopher Socrates conduct due
diligence?
Using the Socratic method, the process of diligence is not
a prescribed format: It’s a shared dialogue between the inves-
tor and the cofounders, and both are responsible for agreeing
on the key challenges, opportunities, and milestones. Venture
capitalists (VCs) often ask probing questions to expose the
risks and identify the assumptions that frame the thoughts
of the cofounders. Yet, good VCs allow the cofounders to
ask questions, as well. The process of excavating risks pro-
gresses interactively, and the conversation is open-ended.
PowerPoint slides are a deterrent, and there is an immense
premium in being in the flow of inquiry rather than using
defensive arguments or ideological posturing.
Both parties account for their thoughts and beliefs. While
knowing facts is important, how the two sides assess these
facts is more important.
The stakes are high. Socratic diligence results in a produc-
tive discomfort.
Both sides acknowledge that there is ambiguity and
uncertainty; the process does not yield clarity as much as
agreement that we are surrounded by darkness. “I don’t
know” is a refreshingly welcome position, that, if followed
through, may yield to surprising outcomes.
Above all, the method aims to keep both parties on a level
playing field. The VC knows as much or as little as the entre-
preneur. Yet VCs pretend, and most entrepreneurs assume,
that VCs have all the answers. It’s up to the VCs to change
this dynamic and create a balanced mutually respectful
learning dynamic.

-- 296 of 546 --

cHecKliSTS — USeFUl BUT SelDOM USeD 	267
The art of conducting due diligence is to know what to ask,
whom to ask, and, more importantly, how to ask. If the Greek
philosopher Socrates would have done due diligence, every
company would open up to new worlds of possibilities.
Nobel Prize–winning author Sinclair Lewis, in his 1922
book Babbit, describes a fictional character, Conrad Lyte, who
was “a nervous speculator . . . before he gambled, he consulted
bankers, lawyers, architects, contracting builders and all of
their clerks and stenographers who were willing to be cornered
and give him advice. He desired nothing more than complete
safety in his investments, freedom from attention to details
and the thirty to forty percent profit, which according to all
authorities, a pioneer deserves for his risks and foresight . . . .”
Not much has changed — due diligence often includes
consulting and cornering people, while aiming for complete
safety in investments and without much attention to detail.
After all, a pioneering VC should make 30–40 percent profit,
a well-deserved return for their risks and foresight.

-- 297 of 546 --



-- 298 of 546 --

23
269
Management Team
Diligence: Assessing the
Intangible
OVERVIEW
In the all-time great movie Moneyball, a mediocre baseball
team uses a statistical data-driven approach to go on and win
19 consecutive baseball games. At the heart of the movie lies
the ability to pick the right team — those baseball players that
would have the grit to win. The classical way of picking players
involved subjective discussions around their good looks and
self-confidence. Their selection criteria included observations
like “clean cut, good face, good jaw. . . he has got the looks — just
needs some time.” One player has an ugly girlfriend “means no
self-confidence” while another player is so self-confident that
“his dick gets in the room two minutes before does.” Commit-
tee members were prone to biases and power dynamics within
their own selection committee. As one member kicks off the
voting by saying, “I like Geronimo,” others quickly agree will-
ingly. “Top of my list” says one. “Real deal,” says another. I
am pretty sure this dynamic plays out in most venture firms
where the leading partner’s views influence the weaker voices
in the room.

-- 299 of 546 --

270 	ManagEMEnt tEaM DIlIgEncE: assEssIng thE IntangIblE
However, once the teams adopt a statistical approach to
picking players, the decision biases become clearer and the
winning streak can begin. Such a decision-making process
is ideal. “At Foundation Capital, we record the minutes of
every opportunity being debated, who raised the risks and
challenges — the goal is to see how our decisions pan out,
as well as who has the clarity of thinking,” says partner Sid
Trivedi. Investors discuss, debate, and oversell their own data-
driven “Moneyball” approach to venture investing. But can it
be applied to measuring strengths of management teams in the
business environment?
The art of diligence of the management team involves
assessing the intangibles — sizing up human potential,
strengths, and weaknesses — all within a few meetings. The
attributes of strong management teams and the chief execu-
tive, the proverbial jockey, are difficult, even nearly impossible
to assess in a few meetings. How can we measure the integrity
of a CEO, their strategic thinking, ability to share a compelling
vision, their salesmanship, attracting investments and a team
of high performers? A lot of the startup CEOs are unproven
rookies, and you have very little relevant data to make a judg-
ment call. Like Don Valentine says, if you have figured it out,
they ought to build a statue to you.
ValUEs anD IntEgRItY
“In looking for people to hire, you look for three qualities:
integrity, intelligence, and energy. And if they don’t have the
first, the other two will kill you. Think about it; it’s true. If you
hire somebody without the first, you really want them to be
dumb and lazy.”1 Warren Buffett reminds us that those who
do not have integrity but have intelligence can not only take
advantage of you, but even kill you. When assessing the man-
agement team, integrity ranks first. Integrity boils down to
the sum total of honesty in words and actions, an ethos that
defines any individual. But there is no easy way to assess this
attribute.

-- 300 of 546 --

ValUEs anD IntEgRItY 	271
Investors 	spend 	an 	extraordinary 	amount 	of 	time
investigating 	business 	skills 	and 	technical 	expertise 	of
entrepreneurs. 	The 	process 	is 	imprecise 	and 	involves
referencing — multiple discussions with people who have
former interactions. One practitioner described this as “looking
in the rear-view mirror” — an approach of predicting the future
based on past behavior. To truly understand the personality
This Is How We Change the World
There are numerous cases of fraud in the startup world — none
as significant as Theranos — a Silicon Valley–based health
care startup. The company claimed a breakthrough in blood-
testing procedures and raised over $500 million. It was val-
ued at $10 billion when a journalist questioned the validity
of the technology. Soon thereafter, the house of cards came
tumbling down revealing an elaborate charade of fraud and
deception. The founder and CEO, Elizabeth Holmes, at one
time stated, “We’ve got an incredible opportunity to try to
uphold a legacy in Silicon Valley of changing the world.”
One investor I spoke with quoted Leo Tolstoy: “What a
strange illusion it is to suppose that beauty is goodness.” A
documentary based on this saga, The Inventor: Out for Blood in
Silicon Valley, is not discussed by VCs as often as Moneyball.
The scale of fraud at Entellium, a Seattle–based devel-
oper of customer relationship management (CRM) tools, was
not as significant as Theranos, but left enough scars for its
investors. The company was recognized as a leader by For-
rester Research, and the CRM magazine touted it as “market
leader” for three consecutive years. But the CEO and CFO
were cooking the books much faster than they could raise
capital. They overstated revenues by as much as three times
for three consecutive years. An employee stumbled on the
actual revenue data while cleaning out a former employee’s
desk and discovered the fraud. Forty people lost their jobs,
and the CEO and CFO were arrested. The lead venture fund
wrote off $19 million as the company was sold in bankruptcy.

-- 301 of 546 --

272 	ManagEMEnt tEaM DIlIgEncE: assEssIng thE IntangIblE
and the mind-set of any entrepreneur, when everyone is in
a rush to close the investment is the biggest challenge of the
venture business. Those who manage to stay above the law but
play games, rush investors to close without sharing relevant
information, or hide beneath a web of lies and inconsistent
behavior are the ones who always get you!
In management diligence, we often see the obvious — this
team is hungry, has solid technical expertise, or has strong
business acumen. Integrity and honesty — fundamental quali-
ties of any management team — are much harder to assess.
Not everyone can avoid a fraud. But can we try to watch for
the subtle warning signals? If we spot any shades of gray, how
can we avoid the impulse of rushing in or find ways to justify
the investment? Knowing what questions to ask and the will-
ingness to walk away from a “hot opportunity” when sufficient
information is not available can save investors from embar-
rassment and losses. Pete Farner of TGap Ventures says, “I use
a simple test in assessing potential CEOs — would I trust them
enough to look after my own kids?” Such a high bar would
eliminate the vast majority of riffraff quickly.
can thE cOMPanY attRact gIants?
Besides integrity, what are the other qualities to look for in any
management team? Can the CEO attract a team of giants — a
team that has experience and can scale the company — to help
build an enduring company? Can she be comfortable working
with people who are more accomplished, smarter, or legends
in their own domains? Or do they hire mediocre midgets who
can barely conduct baseline operations?
Consider William Shockley, who won the Nobel Prize for
co-inventing the transistor. Despite being a brilliant physicist,
Shockley had no people skills and successfully alienated
his two co-inventors, thanks to his brash and abrasive style.
His staff was subjected to lie detector tests, and he publicly
posted their salaries. He was even passed over for promotion
at Bell Labs. When he died, he was completely estranged from

-- 302 of 546 --

can thE cOMPanY attRact gIants? 	273
most of his friends and family — his children read about his
death in the newspapers.2
When eight of Shockley’s researchers, termed as the Traitor-
ous Eight, resigned to start Fairchild Semiconductor, all he did
was write, “Wed 18 Sept — Group Resigns” in his diary.3 Besides
being a poor manager, Shockley’s presentation skills were
terrible. He read all his speeches in a monotone, was a poor
writer, and “flogged metaphors” mercilessly. Larry L. King
wrote of Shockley that he “made such an inept presentation
that he could not have instructed us how to catch a bus.”4
In Shockley’s biography, the importance of management
skills is highlighted, “If Shockley had been a better manager,
he’d be one of the richest people in the world today. He is
the father of Silicon Valley; he knew more than anybody in
the world the importance of these machines, these transistors;
he knew that he was revolutionizing the world; he knew that
if his company could control the direction that the transistor
should go toward, that he would be very rich. Unfortunately,
he was a terrible manager and he never had the chance.” 5
Despite being a brilliant technologist and a Nobel Laureate,
Shockley was his own worst enemy, unable to get over his fear
and insecurities.
Compare that with Steve Jobs. One of the early investors
in Apple, Arthur Rock, recalls his first meeting with Steve Jobs
and Steve Wozniak:
Nevertheless, Rock invested in Apple because Jobs was
articulate.
Jobs came into the office, as he does now, dressed in Levi’s, but
at that time that wasn’t quite the thing to do. And I believe
he had a goatee and a moustache and long hair — and he had
just come back from six months in India with a guru, learning
about life. I’m not sure, but it may have been a while since
he had a bath. . . . And he was very, very thin — he really
belonged somewhere else. Steve Wozniak, on the other hand,
had a full beard, and he’s just not the kind of a person you’d
give a lot of money to.6

-- 303 of 546 --

274 	ManagEMEnt tEaM DIlIgEncE: assEssIng thE IntangIblE
Andreessen Horowitz on the Art of CEO Selection
The art of CEO selection, according to Ben Horowitz, of the
venture firm Andreessen Horowitz, can be summarized in
three words: direction, execution, and results.
Direction: Does the CEO know what to do?
Strategy and decision-making: Does the CEO know what to
do in all matters all of the time? Can the CEO tie the strat-
egy to a story — how is the world a better place, thanks to
this company? A CEO can most accurately be measured by
the speed and quality of her decisions. Great decisions come
from CEOs who display an elite combination of intelligence,
logic, and courage.
Execution: Can the CEO get the company to do what
he or she knows?
Execution and team building: Once a vision is set, does the
CEO have the capacity, and can the CEO execute? Horow-
itz points out that capacity translates to having world-class,
motivated talent. Building a world-class team and ensuring
the quality of the team stays strong is important.
Effectively run the company: Very few CEOs get an A and
fail to scale because the skills required to manage a well-run
organization are wide-ranging, from organizational design
to performance management, incentives, communication,
the whole gamut. The key question to ask is, “Is it easy for
the employees to get their job done?”
Results: Did the CEO achieve the desired results against
an appropriate set of objectives?
Were appropriate objectives established? Too low or too high?
Horowitz warns against setting objectives for early-stage
companies, as no one really knows the size of the opportunity.
Finally, the size and the nature of opportunities vary across
types of companies: some are capital intensive, while others
have measured growth and market adoption. CEOs will per-
form better on a test if they know the questions ahead of time.7

-- 304 of 546 --

can thE cEO EXEcUtE? laMbs VERsUs chEEtahs 	275
can thE cEO EXEcUtE? laMbs VERsUs chEEtahs
Defined as the fine art of getting things done, execution
abilities are one of the top criteria of management assessment.
In an early-stage company, execution would be quite simply
“the ability to define and meet value creation milestones
using optimum resources.” In his New York Times best-selling
book Who: The A Method for Hiring, author Geoff Smart asks,
“What types of CEOs make money for investors?” 8 Smart,
who has frequently interacted with the VC world, grew up in
a family in which psychology was discussed at the breakfast
table. “My father was an industrial psychologist. So when
I interned at a VC firm, I asked the partners what it takes
to be a successful venture capitalist. And they said, it’s all
about management.” But Geoff found that despite all the
emphasis on management, there was no clear methodology
of assessing people. “If people are so important, why is it
that we spend all of this time doing Excel models or market
analysis?” he would ask. He was told that the people part is
intuitive and that there is no way you can evaluate people
accurately. “Had I not had the contextual background of
psychology, I would have taken everything that venture
capitalists told me at face value.” 9
To assess CEO traits, Geoff teamed up with Steven N.
Kaplan, a noted scholar on entrepreneurship and finance at
the University of Chicago. The team went on to conduct the
largest study of CEO traits and financial performance. The
results were both compelling and controversial. Data from
over 300 CEO interviews was compared with the CEO assess-
ments and actual financial performance. Investors often have
a tendency to invest in CEOs who demonstrated openness
to feedback, possess great listening skills, and treat people
with respect. “I call them ‘Lambs’ because these CEOs tend
to graze in circles, feeding on the feedback and direction of
others,” he says. And he concludes that investors love Lambs
because they are easy to work with and were successful for
57 percent of the time.

-- 305 of 546 --

276 	ManagEMEnt tEaM DIlIgEncE: assEssIng thE IntangIblE
But Geoff found that the desirable CEOs are the ones who
move quickly, act aggressively, work hard, demonstrate per-
sistence, and set high standards and hold people accountable
to them. He called them “Cheetahs” because they are fast and
focused: “Cheetahs in our study were successful 100 percent of
the time. This is not a rounding error. Every single one of them
created significant value for their investors.” 10 “Emotional
intelligence is important, but only when matched with the propen-
sity to get things done.”11
Separately, Steven N. Kaplan’s research leads to the same
conclusion. In the study “Which CEO Characteristics and
Abilities Matter?” the authors assess more than 30 individual
characteristics, skills, and abilities.12 Surprisingly, the study
showed that success was not linked to team-related skills and
that such skills are overweighed in hiring decisions. Success
mattered only with CEOs with execution-related skills. The study
asserted Jim Collins’s “Good to Great” description of Level
5 CEOs — they have unwavering resolve and are fanatically
driven. The essential lesson we derive from Shockley’s exam-
ple is that while technical expertise is important, marrying
technical skills with short-term milestones and rapid execution
is critical. As Peter Drucker says, effective executives “get the
right things done”13 — at the right time.
sERIal EntREPREnEURs VERsUs FIRst-tIME
EntREPREnEURs
All things equal, a VC-backed entrepreneur who has taken
a company public has a 30 percent chance of succeeding in
his or her next venture. 14 A failed entrepreneur is next in the
pecking order, with a 20 percent chance of success, and a
first-time entrepreneur has an 18 percent chance. Research-
ers assessed the cause of success and point out that success-
ful entrepreneurs know how to launch companies at the right
time — before the markets get crowded. Market timing skill

-- 306 of 546 --

sERIal EntREPREnEURs VERsUs FIRst-tIME EntREPREnEURs 	277
Leonardo Da Vinci Pitches the Ruler of Milan, Circa 1480
(With no formal academic training, Da Vinci is recognized as a Univer-
sal Genius and a Renaissance Man, who conceptualized armored vehi-
cles, solar power, flying machines, parachutes. And yes, after all that, he
painted some of the most famous works like the “Mona Lisa” and “The
Last Supper.”)
My Most Illustrious Lord,
Having now sufficiently seen and considered the achievements
of all those who count themselves masters and artificers of instru-
ments of war, and having noted that the invention and performance
of the said instruments is in no way different from that in common
usage, I shall endeavor, while intending no discredit to anyone else,
to make myself understood to Your Excellency for the purpose of
unfolding to you my secrets, and thereafter offering them at your
complete disposal, and when the time is right, bringing into effec-
tive operation all those things which are in part briefly listed below:
1. I have plans for very light, strong and easily portable bridges
with which to pursue and, on some occasions, flee the
enemy, and others, sturdy and indestructible either by fire
or in battle, easy and convenient to lift and place in position.
Also means of burning and destroying those of the enemy.
2. I know how, in the course of the siege of a terrain, to remove
water from the moats and how to make an infinite number
of bridges, mantlets and scaling ladders and other instru-
ments necessary to such an enterprise.
3. Also, if one cannot, when besieging a terrain, proceed by
bombardment either because of the height of the glacis or
the strength of its situation and location, I have methods for
destroying every fortress or other stranglehold unless it has
been founded upon a rock or so forth.
4. I have also types of cannon, most convenient and easily
portable, with which to hurl small stones almost like a hail-
storm; and the smoke from the cannon will instill a great fear
in the enemy on account of the grave damage and confusion.
5. Also, I have means of arriving at a designated spot through
mines and secret winding passages constructed completely
(continued)

-- 307 of 546 --

278 	ManagEMEnt tEaM DIlIgEncE: assEssIng thE IntangIblE
without noise, even if it should be necessary to pass under-
neath moats or any river.
6. Also, I will make covered vehicles, safe and unassailable,
which will penetrate the enemy and their artillery, and there
is no host of armed men so great that they would not break
through it. And behind these, the infantry will be able to fol-
low, quite uninjured and unimpeded.
7. Also, should the need arise, I will make cannon, mortar, and
light ordnance of very beautiful and functional design that
are quite out of the ordinary.
8. Where the use of cannon is impracticable, I will assemble
catapults, mangonels, trebuchets, and other instruments of
wonderful efficiency not in general use. In short, as the vari-
ety of circumstances dictate, I will make an infinite number
of items for attack and defence.
9. And should a sea battle be occasioned, I have examples of
many instruments which are highly suitable either in attack
or defense, and craft which will resist the fire of all the heavi-
est cannon and powder and smoke.
10. In time of peace I believe I can give as complete satisfaction
as any other in the field of architecture, and the construc-
tion of both public and private buildings, and in conducting
water from one place to another.
Also I can execute sculpture in marble, bronze, and clay. Like-
wise in painting, I can do everything possible as well as any other,
whosoever he may be.
Moreover, work could be undertaken on the bronze horse
which will be to the immortal glory and eternal honour of the aus-
picious memory of His Lordship your father, and of the illustrious
house of Sforza.
And if any of the above-mentioned things seem impossible
or impracticable to anyone, I am most readily disposed to dem-
onstrate them in your park or in whatsoever place shall please
Your Excellency, to whom I commend myself with all possi-
ble humility.
(continued)

-- 308 of 546 --

bIas at WORK: sEEKIng attRactIVE MEn 	279
is more important than the novelty of the technology. Inter-
estingly, the entrepreneurs who were able to time the market
during their first startup were also able to time the market in
their next startup, as well. Those who can time market cycles
several times are indeed smart: Luck is no longer a factor for
such entrepreneurs. However, with successful entrepreneurs,
the hunger level may drop with success or age. Or worse,
arrogance may set in.
Most management teams will be replaced, either by choice
or by sheer exhaustion, in the travails of the startup journey.
A simple question to consider is: Is this person honest and bold
enough to replace themselves at the right time, even make
themselves redundant?
bIas at WORK: sEEKIng attRactIVE MEn
VCs would not like to think of themselves as biased, but a
Harvard Business School study found male entrepreneurs
were 60 percent more likely to succeed in pitch competition
as compared to female entrepreneurs. And attractive men
were 36 percent more likely to achieve success than their
average-looking counterparts. 68 percent of participants chose
to fund the ventures pitched by a male voice, and only 32
percent of participants chose to fund the ventures pitched by
a female voice.15
Another study conducted by two MIT researchers pre-
dicted, without looking at the business pitches, who would win
a business plan competition with 87 percent accuracy.16 Neither
of the researchers had read the plans or heard their pitches. So
how did they predict with such high accuracy? From “hon-
est signals” exhibited by the presenters. Honest signals are
defined as nonverbal cues — gestures, expressions, and tone.
In an interview with Harvard Business Review, the researcher
Pentland said, “The more successful people are energetic. They
talk more, but they also listen more. . . . It’s not just what they

-- 309 of 546 --

280 	ManagEMEnt tEaM DIlIgEncE: assEssIng thE IntangIblE
Betting on the Last One — The First-Mover Disadvantage
Ajay Royan, co-founder of Mithril Capital, elegantly debunked
the 	first-mover 	advantage 	in 	startup 	investing. 	“PayPal,
Facebook, Google, Airbnb, Uber — none of these companies
were first movers. Rather, these companies did one thing really
well — they shut the door behind them. The rest is history.”
Facebook had over 20 competitors when it launched. Orkut,
another social networking rival, relaunched its service three
months before Facebook’s launch. Orkut was backed by search
giant Google. And six months after Facebook’s launch, MyS-
pace boasted nearly 5 million users. Social networks had clearly
seen a deluge of startups.
With search engines, the story is not too different. Google
was the 18th search engine born five years after the first search
engine was launched. The market was a noisy mess. You had
Infoseek, Lycos, AltaVista, AskJeeves, Excite, to name a few.
(One search engine was even called Dogpile.) And prior to
AirBnb, there was VRBO. In the ridesharing world, before Uber
came SideCar and Lyft.
So if VCs are to look at something beyond the first mover
advantage, what is it? “Look at the market — can this mar-
ket withstand an A-minus founder?” asks Royan. “We should
choose the correct markets — and then ask, not only are these
addressable but are these ownable?”
“A lot of investors are driven by momentum, with a
speculative mindset. You have to be deterministic,” says
Royan. In mathematics, a deterministic system is a system
in which no randomness is involved in the development of
future states.
The business of venture capital is messy, unpredictable, and
has far too many variables that come into play.
But now we know for sure that the first-mover advantage is
not a determinant of success. Instead of agonizing if this is an
A+ team, flip the logic over its head.
Ask if the market can withstand an A-minus team.
And once you make an investment, figure out if this team
can shut the door behind them! And own the market.

-- 310 of 546 --

bacKgROUnD chEcKs: FalsE Mbas anD cRIMInal hIstORIEs 	281
project that makes them charismatic; it’s what they elicit. The
more of these energetic, positive people you put on a team, the
better the team’s performance.” 17 Pentland’s research did not
indicate which pitch will be best — it just indicated who will
win, irrespective of the quality of the idea or the pitch. Venture
capitalists look for buzz and enthusiasm, “but they also need
to understand the substance of the pitch and not be swayed by
charisma alone,” he added.
bacKgROUnD chEcKs: FalsE Mbas
anD cRIMInal hIstORIEs
Studies indicate that roughly 50 percent of job candidates
misrepresent their job credentials although the level and
degree of misrepresentation varies widely.18 Furthermore,
misrepresentations are made by candidates applying for jobs
at all levels of an organization’s hierarchy, including its board
of directors.
Background checks of key portfolio company personnel
are often a component of this due diligence analysis. How-
ever, while background checks will detect some issues with
potential portfolio company managers, an in-depth back-
ground investigation, performed by an experienced pro-
fessional, will yield a more detailed analysis of potential
portfolio company managers and serve to verify the asser-
tions and representations these individuals have made to
the VC funds.
Background investigations include significantly detailed
analyses of potential portfolio company managers. These
investigations 	examine 	individuals’ 	work 	history, 	board
service, educational background, community involvement,
criminal background, and, in some instances, assets. While
this level of information may seem excessive, it is a necessary
component of the due diligence process and serves to miti-
gate future issues a VC fund may encounter with an execu-
tive at a later date. Moreover, the reasons for conducting an
in-depth background investigation as opposed to a cursory

-- 311 of 546 --

282 	ManagEMEnt tEaM DIlIgEncE: assEssIng thE IntangIblE
background check of a potential portfolio company manager
are myriad.
Background investigations cannot only verify informa-
tion presented by job candidates but also provide financial
and legal matters. For example, they may potentially reveal a
candidate has been a party to numerous lawsuits, a corporate
or personal bankruptcy, or a personal drug habit. While some
information revealed in the background investigation may be
of a highly personal nature, such issues may soon impinge on
a candidate’s ability to successfully perform their job, thus put-
ting a portfolio company at risk.
In one episode, several venture partners interviewed a
potential CEO over a period of 10 weeks. Immediately prior to
presenting a final letter of employment, a background inves-
tigation was conducted. This investigation revealed that the
CEO did not have the Harvard MBA he claimed to possess.
The VC fund had to restart the process of interviewing CEO
candidates; 10 weeks of work could have been saved had the
background investigation been conducted at the start of the
interviewing process.
In addition to conducting a preliminary background inves-
tigation, experienced investigators state not only that should
PE and VC funds perform investigations prior to hiring an
But You Are Eight Months Pregnant. . . .
When I started my first company, I met a senior invest-
ment partner who politely said, “I don’t see how I can fund
you. You are eight months pregnant” — that was a fair state-
ment. Three months later, Sequoia funded me, and we were
off to a good start. But the fun began after we closed the
round. Sequoia challenged me, stretched my thinking and
held me to a high standard. At one board meeting, I had to
take a break, hide in the restroom, and cry. They treated me
fairly at every step. When I started my second company, my
first call was to Sequoia and we did it all over again.
— Vani Kola, two-time entrepreneur and founder, Kalaari Capital

-- 312 of 546 --

bacKgROUnD chEcKs: FalsE Mbas anD cRIMInal hIstORIEs 	283
individual but also that investigations should be conducted
periodically throughout the individual’s career. Periodic inves-
tigations maximize the possibility of detecting issues that may
arise after an individual is hired and help minimize potential
damage caused by an unscrupulous employee.
For instance, one experienced investigator discovered Inter-
pol was chasing a number of shareholders of a tiny startup,
as they were the target of a fraud investigation overseas. In
another situation, the investigator uncovered that a company
founder had conveniently transferred assets to his business
partner’s spouse to avoid paying federal taxes. Numerous tax
liens were levied against him.20
Would You Like Some Fries with Your Coke?
Tom Perkins, the late managing partner of Kleiner Perkins
venture firm, experienced “one of the most bizarre episodes”
of his career. After a successful tenure, a portfolio CEO started
to demonstrate paranoia, claiming his office was bugged and
that he was being followed. Perkins discovered the CEO had
a cocaine habit, and the executive was removed. However,
by the time of his removal, the CEO had already exacted sig-
nificant damage on the portfolio company. It soon failed and
was shut down.19
But Nobody Asked Me If I Was a Criminal
Smith & Wesson Holding Corporation chairman James
J. Minder resigned when a newspaper report revealed he
spent up to 15 years in prison for various armed robberies
and a bank heist. Minder maintained he did not cover up
his past. Instead, he stated that no one on Smith & Wesson’s
board asked about his criminal record. A background investi-
gation of Minder could have prevented the embarrassing rev-
elation and allowed the company to better evaluate Minder
as a job candidate.21

-- 313 of 546 --

284 	ManagEMEnt tEaM DIlIgEncE: assEssIng thE IntangIblE
Detailed background investigations are an essential com-
ponent of the due-diligence process. Though they are more
costly than a simple background check, an investigation might
yield a significant piece of information that may prevent future
embarrassment.
VaRIOUs aPPROachEs tO ManagEMEnt DIlIgEncE
Management due diligence is easy; just be prepared to invest,
say, 200 to 300 hours in the process. In conducting CEO due
diligence, investors from storied venture firms such as Accel
Partners, Bessemer, KPCB, Greylock, New Enterprise Associ-
ates (NEA), Sequoia, and Mayfield Fund shared information
on how they assessed management teams of over 80 portfolio
companies.22
Some investors conducted interviews for over 300 hours
over six months, interviewing as many as nine categories of
references leading to detailed assessments of the team. This
approach is compared to the “airline captain approach,” one
in which the pilot checks every parameter to ensure that a
plane is safe to fly. Though the approach is common sense,
fewer than 15 percent of venture capitalists actually use this
approach. Another survey respondent from Accel Partners
said, “Evaluating the management team properly and back-
ing the right people is the difference between success and fail-
ure in this [venture capital] business.” 23 Some investors spent
over a hundred hours on human capital valuation, spread sys-
tematically across various methods, and reference discussions
with people from 11 different categories of references. This
was the highest number of categories of all venture capitalists
in the study, leading to a data-driven decision and less gut-
based reactions. 24
Various styles of assessing human capital include the
airline captain approach, the art critic, the sponge, and
the prosecutor, as developed by Geoff Smart — author of
the best-selling book Who: The A Method for Hiring. Exhibit 23.1
highlights these four — of which the airline captain approach

-- 314 of 546 --

VaRIOUs aPPROachEs tO ManagEMEnt DIlIgEncE 	285
yielded a median internal rate of return of 80 percent. A high
level of systematic and disciplined data collection and analysis
of the management team members characterize this approach.
In contrast, the three primary alternative approaches achieved
internal rates of return under 30 percent. Though airline cap-
tains tend to achieve close to 90 percent accuracy in human
capital valuations, art critics are lucky if they hit 50 percent. If
you’re an art critic, one of two CEOs will crash and burn.
Recall Don Valentine, founder of Sequoia Capital, once
remarked that if you can select people correctly 52 percent of
the time, they ought to have a statue built for you. The moral of
the story is that gut checks are good, but a checklist approach
will avoid the plane crash.
Exhibit 23.1 Due-Diligence Approaches.
Approach 	Description
Airline Captain 	This “checklist approach” of assessing CEO candidates “resembles the way an airline
captain assesses his or her plane prior to takeoff to decide whether it is safe to fly.”
It is the most effective method for yielding top results, but it is also the most time-
consuming and intense.
Art Critic 	An art critic glances at a painting and within a few minutes can offer “an accurate appraisal
of the value of the work.” But art critics in venture capital can be ineffective, especially
when trying to value human capital. They “think that their years of business experience
equip them to achieve an accurate assessment of people in a very short amount of
time — that a person’s human capital is as visible in its entirety as a painting on
the wall. Art critics talk a lot about intuition, gut feel, and “shooting from the hip.”
Unfortunately, they also talk a lot about inaccurate human capital valuations and deals
in which they lost 100 percent of their investment.
Sponge 	“Sponges are like art critics who need a little more data before making an assessment.
Sponges do not perform a human capital needs analysis, but ‘soak up’ data through
multiple methods of human capital valuation — and then synthesize the information in
their gut. As one sponge said, he does ‘due diligence by mucking around.’” The sponge
is proven as effective as an art critic.
Prosecutor 	“Prosecutors act like prosecuting attorneys.” As they walk into the room to conduct an
interview, they will indulge in theatrics, such as slamming a fist on the table, pointing
a finger, and waving their arms. According to the study, “They aggressively question
managers and attempt to ‘pull the truth out of them.’. . . . Prosecutors talk about ‘testing’
management on what they know. The problem with this method is that prosecutors only
collect data on present behaviors — how managers respond to questions in the present,
live, right now. In comparison, past behaviors are more indicative of future behaviors,”
concluded Smart. One of the least effective methods for CEO selection, this method is
best used for interrogations of prison cell mates.
Source: Geoff Smart, Who: The A Method for Hiring (New York: Ballantine Books, 2008).

-- 315 of 546 --

286 	ManagEMEnt tEaM DIlIgEncE: assEssIng thE IntangIblE
In these direct interactions, venture capitalists quiz
the management team on various issues related to the
business. They are called work samples because they
allow the venture capitalist to view samples of how the
managers think and work firsthand. The time that venture
capitalists spent in work samples was positively related to
the accuracy of the human capital valuation in early-stage
deals but negatively related to accuracy in later-stage deals.
Why the difference? In early-stage deals, these discussions
are more probing and often personal. In later-stage deals,
formal presentations by managers coached by investment
bankers can be as misleading as they are informative. The
evidence suggests that work samples are not sufficient for
achieving accurate human capital valuations.
• 	Reference interviewing. “Reference interviews are discus-
sions with people who have observed the behavior of
the target managers. There are several possible sources
of reference interviews: personal references, supervisors,
coworkers, industry players, current employees, suppli-
ers, customers, lawyers, accountants, bankers, or other
investors.”
• 	Past-oriented interviewing. “Whereas the work sample relies
on present or ‘hypothetical’ behavior, past-oriented inter-
views rely on past behavior.” “This method,” branded by
Smart as the top-graded interview, “is based on the notion
that past behavior is the best predictor of future behav-
ior. Therefore, during past-oriented interviews, venture
capitalists talk chronologically with individual managers
about their entire career histories. This interviewing for-
mat has emerged as the most effective personnel assess-
ment method in industrial psychology within the last
five years.”
• 	While these techniques of diligence have been practiced,
here are the top three lessons any practitioner should
watch for.

-- 316 of 546 --

VaRIOUs aPPROachEs tO ManagEMEnt DIlIgEncE 	287
As venture practitioners, there is seldom enough time to
understand the abilities and creative elements of any candi-
date. The biggest challenge is assessing the intangibles in a
very short time.
Some practitioners have started to bring in shrinks and
personal coaches to engage with CEOs. The process has
its own challenges 26 and results are unclear. A number of
other personality tests exist, such as the Myers-Briggs Type
Indicator (MBTI), where a varied set of multiple-choice
questions can help establish a window into a person’s
emotional and intellectual construct. The MBTI is a Jungian
personality test that qualifies people into 1 of 16 types based
on how they focus their attention, analyze information, make
decisions, and orient themselves into the external world.
For example, ESTJ, for extraversion (E), sensing (S),
thinking (T), judgment (J), people would be defined as fol-
lows: “practical, realistic, matter-of-fact. Decisive, quickly
moves to implement decisions. Organizes projects and peo-
ple to get things done, focuses on getting results in the most
efficient way possible. Has a clear set of logical standards,
systematically follows them. Forceful in implementing their
plans.” 27 While the MBTI output paints a picture, it doesn’t
offer clarity as to whether an ESTJ is suited to be a venture
capitalist.
Top Three Reasons Given by Venture Capitalists for Bad
Hiring Decisions
1. Speed. Sign that term sheet quickly and get the deal done.
Pressure to invest is due to competition or co-investors.
2. Halo effect. What a rock star — great past performance
or great technology! We just ought to be grateful to be
a part of this investment.
3. Too many cooks. A number of syndicate partners,
other team members, and no head chef. 25

-- 317 of 546 --

288 	ManagEMEnt tEaM DIlIgEncE: assEssIng thE IntangIblE
Some investors use a behavioral test for almost all hiring
decisions. Equating a person’s interest with a person’s ability
is a flawed approach. You have a lot of wannabe CEOs, but
do they have the requisite abilities? Most tests are also easily
faked. Obviously, if you ask the true-false question “I am a
responsible person,” the probability that anyone would select
false is near zero. But well-designed tests are structured to
eliminate these challenges. Furthermore, desirable qualities
for certain positions may be handicaps for others: for example,
impulsiveness and originality can be ideal in creative zones but
can be seen as evidence of weakness or instability in financial
and accounting realms. Keeping the perspective of the person
as a whole and not relying on past experience as a prime quali-
fication are two essential ingredients of a good test design, but
the ability to match the person to a role is critical. A person’s
ability to influence, build relationships, solve problems, make
decisions, and organize can be aligned with specific job func-
tions that determine whether the best match can be crafted. For
example, a manager and a salesperson need varying degrees of
certain skills: the ability to persuade others and gain satisfac-
tion from the successful persuasion, the degree of self-respect,
the ability to keep pushing when everyone says no with strong
sense of self. A CEO has a healthy ego when he or she can take
no for an answer yet keep moving in the right direction with-
out flinching.
Once Tim Draper, founder of Draper Fisher Jurvetson
venture firm, asked an entrepreneur, “And what will you do
if the idea does not take off?” The young entrepreneur said,
“I will try something else — maybe find a job.” At which point,
Tim said, “Entrepreneurs never give up.” Such events do not
destroy the self-image but rather, drive hunger for the next
opportunity. This is the key to resilience. People who take rejec-
tions personally lose steam very quickly: They escape — find
that it’s better to not make the next call. They invite rejection,
or worse, potential conflicts. On the other hand, the ability to
persuade coupled with the intense need to persuade can yield a
highly productive leader.

-- 318 of 546 --

VaRIOUs aPPROachEs tO ManagEMEnt DIlIgEncE 	289
But in most venture-backed startups, while attracting
top-level talent may be important, the stability of teams
is entirely unpredictable. Churn of top-level talent occurs
due to a number of reasons — the pace, the pressures, low
cash positions, missed milestones — and thus, practitioners
need to realize that while management teams are important,
no one can predict when teams run out of steam and hit the
bottom — or give up!
Professor Steven N. Kaplan of the University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business studied 50 venture-backed
companies that evolved from business plan to IPO and found
that management turnover is substantial. Kaplan concludes
that investors in startups should place more weight on the
horse, as in the business, and not the jockey. And all the
hoo-ha about quality of management may be important in
the early stages, but it declines rapidly: only 16 percent of the
companies stress the importance of management expertise at
the time of the IPO. Founders get slayed quickly along the
way: Only 49 percent of the venture capital–backed founders
stayed until the IPO.
Kaplan concludes: “Human capital is important, but the
specific person appears less so. A business with strong non-
people assets is enduring.” 28 “The glue holding the firm
together at a very early stage is composed of the patents, the
stores, and the processes. Except, perhaps, for raw startups,
VCs should bet on the horse. We see the jockeys changing, but
we don’t see the horse changing.”29
Don Valentine of Sequoia Capital summarized it succinctly:
“I think choosing great people is much more difficult than
picking great markets because we have always understood the
technology and understood the markets.”30
But maybe technology can solve this problem. Personali-
ties are influenced by genes, and while venture capitalists
have not yet launched genetics-based tests as a part of man-
agement due diligence, those days may not be too far away.
Business leaders tend to be unconscientious, introverted,
and disagreeable. Think Steve Jobs. Genes that trigger such

-- 319 of 546 --

290 	ManagEMEnt tEaM DIlIgEncE: assEssIng thE IntangIblE
Fast Electric Cars, Rocket Ships, and Mars Colonization —
Would You Invest in This Pot-Smoking Entrepreneur?
Born in South Africa, and a self-taught computer programmer, Elon
Musk sold his first software at the age of 12, a space game called
Blast Star, for about $500. He enrolled at Stanford to get a PhD in
applied physics but dropped out after two days to fulfill his entre-
preneurial dreams.
His first venture was Zip2, an online publishing platform for
the media industry. Things were pretty tough in the beginning,
and he didn’t have enough money. He sold Zip2 to Compaq for
$307 million, in which he made approximately $22 million. He
cofounded X.com, offering online financial services and email pay-
ments, which eventually went on to become PayPal. eBay acquired
PayPal for $1.5 billion, and at the time of sale Musk was the largest
shareholder, owning 11.7 percent.
For his final frontier, Musk founded his third company, SpaceX
or Space Exploration Technologies, a designer and manufacturer
of advanced rockets and spacecraft, with $100 million of his own
moolah. The ultimate goal of SpaceX is to enable people to live on
other planets. In six years, SpaceX launched its first rocket, Falcon 1,
into orbit at a cost of roughly $7 million, which was a reduction by
a factor of 10 over the prevailing costs.
Ken Howery of Founder’s Fund, an investor in SpaceX, points
out that “Elon plans on running SpaceX for the rest of his life. It will
take him ten to twenty years to get a man on Mars. Potential inves-
tors thought we were crazy to back this rocket company, but we had
followed it for six years. Elon had taken much risk out of it and even
invested $100 million of his own. We won’t see much competition any-
time soon in this category.”31
Musk is also the CEO of Tesla Motors, a publicly traded company
manufacturing electric cars. Musk has unveiled a prototype for a
“hyperloop,” or a supersonic air travel machine to carry people
from San Francisco to Los Angeles in 35 minutes. The proposed
speed of up to 800 miles per hour is faster than most commercial
airliners. This concept is aimed to make long-distance travel
cheaper than any other means of transportation. So there you have
it — a founder with 3 businesses each of which has broken the
conventional VC model.

-- 320 of 546 --

VaRIOUs aPPROachEs tO ManagEMEnt DIlIgEncE 	291
behavior include DRD2 variant, which causes impulsiveness,
and DRD4, which makes a person novelty seeking. COMT is
called the worrier gene variation that facilitates risk-taking
tendencies. HTR2A causes persistence, and MAOA varia-
tion is anti-social, causing others to follow them by offering
a vision of the future. Finally, the FAAH variation reduces
fear and increases reaction to money making. 32 Next time
you want to pick a solid founder, go ahead and send them
a gene-testing kit as a part of your diligence. Ensure that
DRD2, COMT, MAOA, and FAAH markers are present. Let
me know how it goes.

-- 321 of 546 --



-- 322 of 546 --

24
293
Market, Product,
and Business Model
Analysis
The graveyard of startup land is littered with technologies in
search of markets, a hammer in search of a nail. To identify
the direction and timing of a market is a dark art, but to pick
the winning company in an evolving opaque new market is a
compounded challenge.
“The information required to make decisive investments in
disruptive technology simply does not exist . . . it needs to be
created through fast, inexpensive and flexible forays into the
market,” wrote Clayton Christensen in The Innovator’s Dilemma.
As an investor, how best should we prepare to make fast forays
in the market? How best should we understand market risk?
• 	Is there an unmet need, a pent-up demand, a potential
market pull for the products? Customers rarely know
what they want and market adoption rates differ for
various technologies.
• 	Is the market demand emerging, mature, or
fragmented?
• 	What is the growth potential? Can the given opportu-
nity grab a large market share quickly?
• 	What is the competitive advantage of the opportunity?
Is it sustainable? How does it fit within the current state
of competition?

-- 323 of 546 --

294 	Market, Product, and Business Model analysis
• 	Are there any existing barriers to entry? Is there free-
dom to operate? Is there an existing structure of market
players? Warren Buffett says, “It’s no fun being a horse
when a tractor comes along. Or the blacksmith when
the car comes along.”
• 	Who is going to suffer the maximum pain when this
product arrives in the market?
“We go to great lengths to be tuned into market trends,
speaking to people in the industry, understanding the
currents and identifying interesting opportunities. If you
don’t understand the problem firsthand, you don’t have
an insight into creating a solution,” says Roelof Botha of
Sequoia Capital. 1
Market readiness is a quaint term that almost killed PayPal
in its early years. Prior to joining Sequoia, Roelof Botha was
the CFO of this startup, and its goal was to develop cryptogra-
phy software for handheld devices. Co-founder Max Levchin,
partnered with Peter Thiel, then a hedge fund manager. Thiel
invested initial capital in PayPal and complemented Levchin’s
technical acumen. Peter bought into the premise that there is
demand for cryptography and that it is a relatively untapped
and poorly understood market.
“The assumption was that the enterprises were all going
to go to handheld devices . . . as a primary means of commu-
nication. Every corporate dog in America will hang around
with some kind of device. These assumptions were accurate,
except that the timing was wrong — too early by about a
decade. Any minute now, there’ll be millions of people beg-
ging for security on their handheld devices,” Levchin would
recall. But those millions never came. Pretty soon, they real-
ized that the market was not ready. It was a nightmare that
every investor dreads — a technology in search of a market.
“It’s really cool, it’s mathematically complex, it’s very secure,
but no one really needed it,” Levchin would say. The com-
pany went through as many as six pivots before it found its
groove. Four years from its inception, PayPal was acquired
by eBay for $1.5 billion.

-- 324 of 546 --

Market, Product, and Business Model analysis 	295
Compare this example with Twitter, a company that suc-
ceeded despite all its management challenges. “When the
Twitter site went down for three hours, ardent fans sent home-
made cookies to the engineers at the office with a note, ‘We
know you guys are working hard to get the site up. Thanks for
everything you do,’” Bijan Sabet, Spark Capital, early inves-
tor in Twitter, would recall.2 Mike Maples of Floodgate Fund
would say, “People wondered how we could invest in some-
thing as frivolous as Twitter. If you would have gone into a VC
partnership and said, I do not know how it is going to make
me money, but the founder is a stud, people would look at
you like, ‘But it’s still 140 characters or less! Huh?’” 3 Accord-
ing to Todd Dagres of Spark Capital, the rationale to invest in
Twitter was clear: “When we invested, the traction was largely
among early, techie adopters. We thought the appeal would
spread from the tech community to the general population
so we invested. We were not obsessed with monetization when we
invested. [Italics added.] We felt comfortable that monetization
would follow if Twitter could build a large and engaged com-
munity,”4 he remarked.
Market readiness, or the buyer’s willingness to trigger a
purchase of their accord, can be an ongoing challenge for
investors. Exhibit 24.1 shows various technologies and their
speed of adoption. The rate of adoption in the post-Internet era
is remarkably fast and steep. Companies can achieve global
growth and adoption very quickly. But at the same time, the
noise on the web is significant. A ready buyer, willing to move
fast, can spark a startup’s product-market fit — that magi-
cal moment when the sales motions generate repetitive and
predictable outcomes. Adrian Fortino of Mercury Fund says
that the biggest pain for an investor is working through this
phase of uncertainty. “An investor (and even the startups) can’t
will, or push the market to adopt a product. The companies need
to learn and iterate until they get to an adoption acceleration
point that signals this fit. But it can be a very painful process
for everyone involved before that point.”
When it comes to trends, investor Peter Thiel warns, “Once
you have a trend, you have many people doing it. And once

-- 325 of 546 --

296 	Market, Product, and Business Model analysis
you have many people doing something, you have lots of com-
petition and little differentiation. You do not want to be the
twelfth thin-panel solar company or the Nth company of any
particular trend. Trends should be avoided. What I prefer over
trends is a sense of mission. That you are working on a unique
problem that people are not solving elsewhere.”5
eValuatinG tHe Product
While conducting due diligence for products or technology,
look for what pain points this product solves, and whether
anyone will pay for it:
• 	Primary value proposition. Quite simply put, does the
stated solution offer a significant advantage — a sig-
nificantly quantifiable improvement over the current
solution? Is it faster, better, or cheaper? Terry McGuire
of Polaris Ventures says, “Early on in my career, I found
every technology fascinating — my reaction would be,
100
75
50
25
0
Laggards
16%
Late
Majority
34%
Early
Majority
34%
Early
Adopters
13.5%
Innovators
2.5%
Market share %
Exhibit 24.1 Diffusion of innovation.

-- 326 of 546 --

eValuatinG tHe Product 	297
‘You can do that, really!’ — but over time, I found that
you need healthy skepticism. Believe that the world can
be changed, but ask all the right questions.”6
• 	Development stage. Where is the idea in development? Is
it a mere idea on a napkin, is it in the beta stage, is it
already shipping, or are the first customers at hand?
• 	Can it be protected? How easy is it for another entrant to
jump in? Is this an execution play, where better execu-
tion could lead to more market share? Or is it a secret
sauce, where the patents, processes, or intellectual prop-
erty can be used to build a moat around the business?
• 	Market acceptance and adoption rate. Several points of fric-
tion may come into play as the new technology/product
tries to penetrate the market. While this is harder to ana-
lyze, the challenge is to ascertain the market pain and rea-
sons for adoption. Are the needs of early adopters — the
first customers — and the mass market aligned?
There Must Be Something Here. . . . How an Angel
Investor Spots Google
Entrepreneur and investor K. Ram Shriram recounted
his initial meeting with Sergey and Larry, co-founders of
Google. Ram told them that the time for search engines had
come and gone. They should sell their technology to some
existing search engine companies. Sergey and Larry fol-
lowed his advice and shopped around their search engine
technology to several existing companies, but nobody
wanted to buy the technology. They called Ram Shriram.
“No one wants to buy us. . . . our search engine is too fast
and brutally efficient . . . it would hurt their current busi-
nesses and cut their banner-ad revenues by half. . . .” Sens-
ing the opportunity, Shriram promptly wrote a check that
led to the first $500,000 angel round in Google. While mak-
ing this investment, he was skeptical. “I still did not believe
that this would succeed,” Ram would recall.

-- 327 of 546 --

298 	Market, Product, and Business Model analysis
• 	Growth potential. What percentage of growth can be
achieved in the first five years, and how does that com-
pare with the size of the overall market? What is the
effective mechanism to reach such potential? What are
the points of friction in growth? Is the sales cycle long?
What distribution channels exist?
Intellectual property (IP) due diligence often focuses on:
• 	Are the ownership, title, assignments, and license agree-
ments in place?
• 	What are the claims and scope of protection (technical
and geographic)?
• 	Noninfringement — does the core IP address the
company’s primary products? Does the company have
freedom to operate? Are there any blocking patents?
• 	Can the IP be invalidated in a litigious environment?
Is any threatened or pending litigation foreseen?
It is important to consider the product in conjunction
with the timbre of the entrepreneur. In a study, Saras
Sarasvathy finds that “starting with exactly the same product,
the entrepreneurs ended up creating companies in 18 completely
disparate industries!” 7
As the French writer Antoine de Saint Exupéry wrote,
“A rock pile ceases to be a rock pile the moment a single man
contemplates it, bearing within him the image of a cathedral.” 8
Sarasvathy builds a theory of effectuation whereby given
means can lead to several imagined end points. The means
in any entrepreneurial environment are meager: personal
traits, expertise, and social networks. There is no elaborate
planning — to the contrary, the plans are made and unmade,
recast on a daily basis as entrepreneurs uncover new informa-
tion. Seasoned entrepreneurs know surprises are no deviations
from the path but are the norm from which one learns how to
forge a path.

-- 328 of 546 --

assessinG tHe Business Model 	299
assessinG tHe Business Model
A business model defines how value is created and monetized.
It succinctly addresses the who (target customer), the how (dis-
tribution strategy), leading to how much (gross margins), and
how fast (revenue growth).
The set of choices any company makes differentiates their
business and establishes its costs and gross margins. Examples
Ethics and Diligence: Avoid This Move
David Cohen, cofounder of Techstars accelerator network,
writes, “A VC Asshat Move is when a VC initiates a meeting
with a startup that competes directly with another startup
that they are planning to fund.”9 In this “asshat” move, the
VC reaches out (usually through an associate or principal)
and says they heard about your awesome business. They’re
interested in the space and wondering if the founder can
come in for a meeting. A founder goes in so that the asshat
(or possibly unwitting) associate/partner VC can assess you
against the company they’re about to fund.
To the startup, this all feels as if the VC is just interested in
startup. The VC has brains. It feels good to the founder. Then
they say no. Then 30 days later, they fund a competitor. A
founder can be bummed that the VC picked a competitor. How-
ever, maybe it’s more devious than that. Maybe they already
picked them, before they even met with the founder! They got
the founder to come in and tell them all your secrets, and now they’re
invested in the other company. It happens all the time.
So avoid being an asshat VC, and treat the founder the
way you would like to be treated — with transparency and
respect. Try, “We are looking at various companies in this
space and are nowhere close to investing in any of them.
Can we talk or meet so that we can understand this mar-
ket better?”

-- 329 of 546 --

300 	Market, Product, and Business Model analysis
of business model jargon include “bricks and mortar” model,
“razor blade” model, and “freemium” model, to name a few.
The business model determines the efficiencies of meeting the
customer needs and ergo impacts the margins and costs for
operating. However, at the very early stages of any company,
the business model may not be clear. Many investors have
passed on opportunities at this stage.
In an interview with NBC, Eric Schmidt, former CEO
of Google, recalls his first meeting with Larry and Sergey,
and subsequently, his challenges with the Google busi-
ness model.
“Larry and Sergey were sitting there . . . they looked like chil-
dren to me. I certainly did not see the success of the company
and thought it was a terrible risk. I did not understand the
advertising business at all and thought it was a joke. I thought
there was something wrong in the cash position . . . they could
never be making so much money as they claimed. My first act
was to investigate the books to make sure this was legit. . . .
I asked to see the money was coming in to prove that the
people were actually paying for these adwords. . . . I over-
heard that a customer who was not getting their reports was
screaming at one of the sales executives! I asked our Google
sales executive, why is he screaming at you and she said, ‘You
don’t understand Eric, their business needs cash every day
and we are their business.’ And then all of a sudden, I got it!”
he recalled.10
Pricing Power
The single-most important decision in evaluating a business
is pricing power. If you’ve got the power to raise prices with-
out losing business to a competitor, you’ve got a very good
business. And if you have to have a prayer session before
raising the price by a tenth of a cent, then you’ve got a ter-
rible business. I’ve been in both, and I know the difference.
— Warren Buffett

-- 330 of 546 --

assessinG tHe Business Model 	301
Schmidt joined Google and took the company public three
years later, valuing the company at $23 billion. At the time
of his departure, Google’s market capitalization was over
$180 billion.
At the very early stages of venture investment, practition-
ers rarely debate the financial projections. Rather, shrewd ven-
ture practitioners test the assumptions and capital required
to achieve value inflection. “What are the milestones that this
financing will achieve? As the company progresses to matu-
ration with Series B or Series C rounds and starts to gener-
ate some revenues, the financial projections are analyzed in
greater detail. Financial budgets are essential in early stages.
Investors and management teams need to agree upon the
major spend areas and what value such spending would
What Business Model? We Are Just a Bunch of Kids
Farting Around . . .
Speaking with Wall Street Journal, Marc Andreessen describes
the kabuki-dancers who play clueless when asked about
their business model. “Everybody thinks they don’t know
how they’re going to make money but they actually know”
he points out. But he also warns not too take all what you
see at face value. “Some of the founders will do this Kabuki
dance.. pretending that we’re just a bunch of kids farting around
and don’t know how we’re going to make money. It’s an act.
They don’t let anyone else realize they have it figured out
because that would just draw competition.” Examples like
Facebook and LinkedIn fall into this category. But then he
warns us not to dismiss the ones that do not know how the
business model will evolve. “You need to be very cautious on
these things because one of the companies that had no idea
how it was going to make money when it first started was
Google.”11

-- 331 of 546 --

302 	Market, Product, and Business Model analysis
create. Practitioners do not put much emphasis on detailed
projections in early stages, but rather use them effectively to
understand aspects of the business.
Arthur Rock, who raised the first round of capital for Intel,
recalls, “I wrote the business plan myself, just two-and-a-half
pages, double-spaced, which said nothing! . . . Normally I don’t
write business plans — the companies write a business plan.
But in this case, I just felt that the investors were already there
and all we needed to do was give them a little sheet of paper
they could put in their files.”12 In an interesting study of over
a hundred ventures, researchers concluded there was “no dif-
ference between the performance of new businesses launched
with or without a written business plan.”
Aristotle once remarked, “For it is the mark of an edu-
cated man to look for precision in each class of things just so far
as the nature of the subject admits; it is evidently equally fool-
ish to accept probable reasoning from a mathematician and to
demand from a rhetorician, scientific proofs.”13 In short, seek
precision where it matters. Market pain, pull and growth have
often forgiven the wrongs of financial projections.

-- 332 of 546 --

25
303
“Reading a term sheet is no more interesting than reading the
latest volume of the Federal Register. And most lawyers will
tell you what the terms mean but not how they can be used
to screw you, how to negotiate them, and what is the norm,”
writes Mark Suster of Upfront Ventures.
Term sheets are dense with legalese, filled with jargon
designed to protect, but very hard to understand. Most of
terms don’t apply to a large number of transactions, but they
are there because someone got screwed in one situation and
that led to the addition of a new term. Before you know it, it
has ballooned into a big hairy lump, hard to entangle. You hire
attorneys to take this pain away, but if you do not understand
the structural elements, it can come back and bite you.
Much has been written about term sheets, including line-
by-line explanations and analysis, but it is akin to looking at
minutiae — the trees — when the perspective of the forest is
critical. The goal of this chapter is to simplify, prioritize, and
focus on the forest — or the key terms that help complete a
transaction. In the end, it’s only a handful of terms that matter.
Terms and Conditions
Apply
The Art of Structuring
Investment Transactions

-- 333 of 546 --

304 	Terms and CondiTions apply
THe spiriT oF THe Term sHeeT
After due diligence, investors propose a set of investment
terms that define the transaction. At the heart of it, both the
entrepreneurs and investors agree on the following underly-
ing spirit of the term sheet:
• 	The investment opportunity and market conditions are
ripe for rapid growth.
• 	Both 	parties 	bring 	a 	unique 	set 	of 	elements 	—
entrepreneurial passion and capital — and together,
these elements can help catalyze and create value faster.
• 	Both parties agree to collaborate for a meaningful period
of time, ideally until “exit do us part.”
• 	Both parties understand that financial success is critical
for both parties, as is the timing of returns.
While this credo can be established, there can be several
points of creative tension or stress between the two parties.
neGoTiaTion sTress poinTs
The potential stress points in any negotiation — between
the buyer (the VC) and seller (the company) — can occur
around the economic or control factors. Exhibit 25.1 identifies
these stress points and the relevant terms that can be dialed
up or down.
The two major types of investment structures are convert-
ible loans and preferred stock. The simplest form of invest-
ment, a debt would be governed by some basic parameters,
such as the principal, interest rate, collateral, and schedule of
payments. Debt may be secured by collateral such as assets
and/or receivables, or it may be unsecured. An unsecured debt
acts as a quasi-security. In this chapter, convertible note — a
debt that converts to equity under given circumstances — and
preferred stock structures are presented. The preferred stock

-- 334 of 546 --

neGoTiaTion sTress poinTs 	305

-- 335 of 546 --

306 	Terms and CondiTions apply
is the most commonly used investment structure in venture
capital investments. At the heart of it, investment structures
are designed with two key parameters: economics and control.
As Brad Feld of the Foundry Group points out, terms sheets
are really simple if we focus on what matters:
1. Ownership and economics. Buying a meaningful slice of
the company at the right price is the first step for any
investor. But most savvy practitioners know that while
valuation is important, the potential of the opportu-
nity in the long run, as well as other investment terms,
matters. In some investments, such as distressed real
estate, the philosophy that “you make money when you
buy” may be true; with VC investments, that may not
necessarily be the case. A pre-money value of $8 million
or $10 million is not that significant when the oppor-
tunity could potentially offer a billion-dollar exit. The
price-based debate creates undue tension at the point
when a relationship is being established.
2. Governance and control. Also described as protection or
control aspects of an investment, these rights minimize
risks, protect against any downside, and thereby poten-
tially amplify the upside. Governance is established by
the board of directors, which typically appoints the CEO
and approves an annual plan, budget, and major busi-
ness decisions. The board is controlled by investors and
establishes certain protective provisions to ensure that
the management does not jeopardize the security inter-
ests of the investors.
Exhibit 25.2 details the various investment terms.

-- 336 of 546 --



-- 337 of 546 --



-- 338 of 546 --

26
309
OVERVIEW
A good investment structure allows an investor to double up
and invest higher amounts as the opportunity progresses — or
minimize the risks if it craters. The two major types of invest-
ment structures are (a) convertible loan, also called convertible
note — which converts to preferred equity and (b) preferred
equity. These are compared in Exhibit 26.1. Convertible notes
are often termed as “company friendly” as investors have
only economic upside with little recourse for recovering their
investment, nor do they have any control provisions and hence
are exposed to a high level of risk. At the seed and early stages,
convertible notes are the de facto norm and considered as a
standard structure.
CONVERTIBLE LOANS AND SAFE
The convertible loan (also called convertible note) is a simple
and popular investment structure that is used more often by
angel investors and early-stage investors.
A convertible loan starts with senior position on the bal-
ance sheet and drops down, or converts to equity, when
the company meets certain milestones. Primarily used as
a risk-mitigation tactic in the early stages of the company, a
Structure of
the Term Sheet

-- 339 of 546 --

310 	STRuCTuRE OF ThE TERm ShEET
convertible note allows the investor to claim the assets of a
startup if it fails. Alternatively, in certain conditions, the note
holder can “call” the note, or ask for redemption under certain
trigger conditions.
The key parameters that come into effect with convertible
notes are principal, interest rate, and conversion trigger points.
After the conversion, the interest payments are terminated,
and appropriate changes on the balance sheet (the liabilities
are shifted to the equity section) are duly recorded. Typical
convertible note terms include the following:
• 	Interest rate. Depending on the risk investor’s appetite,
interest rates vary from 3 percent upward to as much as
Exhibit 26.1 Convertible Loan and Preferred Equity.
Terms 	Convertible Loan 	Preferred Equity 	Remarks
Structure 	Debt, if secured, is senior
to all equity.
Preferred shares, junior
to debt and senior to
common equity
Convertible loans are used
in earlier stages of
the company. As the
company progresses, later
investments are structured
as equity rounds.
Bridge loans are structured in
interim financing rounds.
Most convertible loans
are often unsecured,
or companies have no
substantial assets to
offer as collateral, hence
the notes and act like
preferred equity.
Speed
of closing
Fast — typically, in
weeks
Slower — typically, months 	Convertible loans require
lighter legal inputs and
regulatory filings.
Legal costs 	Low 	High
Economics 	Cap, interest rate,
discount rate, and
conversion triggers
Valuation, liquidation;
preferences and
anti-dilution
Typical terms for ensuring
ownership is priced.
Control and
governance
None until converted 	Board seats, voting rights 	Investors have full control
provisions with
preferred equity.

-- 340 of 546 --

CONVERTIBLE LOANS AND SAFE 	311
10 percent; it is normal to accrue interest for most con-
vertible notes.
• 	Term. Typical terms are one year, but notes can be as
much as two years or longer.
• 	Conversion triggers. The note converts to preferred stock
upon raising a predetermined amount in a Series A round.
• 	Improving the returns. Investors frequently add a few
other terms in the mix to improve the returns.
• 	Discounts. For example, a 20 percent discount is
given to the share price of the next round.
• 	Warrants. Warrants would act as sweeteners and
help aggregate a higher ownership through addi-
tional shares at a lower price point.
• 	Capped convertible notes. A capped convertible note estab-
lishes a cap on valuation for the next round; for example,
a cap at $20 million pre-money indirectly establishes the
valuation of $20 million at the next round. VC Mark Sus-
ter warns, “A sword that can cut both ways, a convertible
note with cap, could hurt the entrepreneur. It basically
sets the maximum price rather than your actual price.
Example: If you do a convertible note, raising $500,000 at a
$5 million pre-money, your ceiling is 10 percent of the com-
pany ($500,000/$5 million post-money). But your actual
next round might come in at $2 million pre-money. You
might have been better just negotiating an agreed price
in the first place. Not always, but sometimes.”1 Capped
notes work in favor of investors in such situations.
Consider Exhibit 26.2, which assumes that each investor
puts in $100,000. The cap on conversion moves steadily upward
from $3 million to $20 million, as the company progresses
with its milestones. The final investor comes in at 12 percent
discount, but no cap. The effect of cap on conversion can be
seen when a Series A round is closed at a $12 million pre-
money valuation with an effective share price of $1.29. Only

-- 341 of 546 --

312 	STRuCTuRE OF ThE TERm ShEET
investor 1 and investor 2 benefit from the cap. Interestingly,
investor 4, who negotiated a discount on the next-round price,
benefits, too.
Similar to a convertible note, a bridge note is raised to meet
certain short-term needs of a company. Typically used between
financing rounds, a bridge loan bridges a company between its
existing cash and a future financing round. Terms are similar
to a convertible note. Investors are leery of a bridge to nowhere
and may build in a stair-stepped interest rate, warrants, or
incentives. Thus, if the bridging event does not occur as pre-
dicted, investors gain additional ownership.
Silicon Valley accelerator Y Combinator introduced the
SAFE (simple agreement for future equity) — a simple and fast
way to get that first money into the company. A convertible
Just Don’t F— It Up
Peter Thiel was one of the first angel investors in Facebook.
He invested $500,000 as a convertible loan that would con-
vert to equity if Facebook achieved its milestone of 1.5 million
users. “Just don’t fuck it up,” Thiel said to Mark Zuckerberg
at the time of investing.
Since Thiel had a $5m cap on his note, when Accel
invested at $100m valuation, Thiel’s $500,000 got him 10.2
percent equity, implying an effective valuation of $4.9 million
for his investment, while Accel paid $100 million premoney.
Thiel’s investment grew 20X in one year, and in six years,
Facebook’s value grew to an estimated $50 billion. Thiel’s
investment had grown by 10,000X.2
Exhibit 26.2 Impact of Capped Conversion.
Investor 	Cap 	Discount (%) 	Conversion Price ($)
Investor 1 	$3,000,000 	0 	0.46
Investor 2 	$5,000,000 	0 	0.77
Investor 3 	$20,000,000 	0 	1.29
Investor 4 	None 	12 	1.14

-- 342 of 546 --

KEEPING TERm ShEETS SImPLE 	313
note is often unsecured but a form of debt, with an interest
rate and maturity date, while a SAFE is a convertible security
that is not debt. A SAFE is simpler and shorter than most con-
vertible notes. Both SAFEs and convertible notes convert into
equity in a future priced equity round and can have valuation
caps, discounts, and most-favored-nation clauses. It is impor-
tant to ensure that the SAFE applies post-money ownership so
that founders and investors alike realize the impact of dilution
of the SAFE round.
In summary, convertible notes are used when speed matters
to both sides — the company as well as the investors, and valu-
ation negotiations are postponed for another day. Or as some
VCs say, you kick the can down the road. However, this creates
a risk for VCs as the price for their ownership depends on (a)
execution of milestones and (b) pricing of the next round. Most
early-stage investors are often glad to get into a hot deal and
bet that the execution and growth will counter the pricing risk,
and that they will get a 10,000X outcome, just like Thiel did.
KEEPING TERm ShEETS SImPLE
Seed investments often focus on a few key parameters such as
amount of investment and valuation (and hence the percent-
age of investor ownership). Other terms such as liquidation
preferences, antidilution, board seats, and information rights
are mentioned for clarity but are not heavily negotiated.
A simple Series Seed term sheet3 can be boiled down to one
page as seen at the end of this chapter:
A simple summary term sheet is an elegant solution to
the dense and onerous several-hundred-page term sheet. The
model is better and minimizes legal expenses particularly
for smaller seed investments. The law offices of Wilson Son-
sini Goodrich and Rosati (WSGR) have developed an online
tool that generates a venture financing term sheet based on
inputs/responses to an online questionnaire. 4 Roald Dahl,
popular writer of children’s fiction (and Sequoia partner, Roe-
lof Botha’s favorite author), wrote a short story back in 1954

-- 343 of 546 --

314 	STRuCTuRE OF ThE TERm ShEET
called “The Great Automatic Grammatizator,” in which an
inventor concludes that the rules of grammar follow mathe-
matical principles. He creates a mammoth grammatizator — a
machine that can write a prize-winning novel in 15 min-
utes. Wilson Sonsini has developed such an engine, a term-
sheetizator if you will, that takes a few inputs and magically
outputs complete term sheets. The WSGR term sheet genera-
tor is free — and even has an informational component, with
basic tutorials and annotations on financing terms. This term
sheet generator is a modified version of a tool that the firm
uses internally, which comprises document automation tools
that the firm uses to generate startup and venture financing-
related documents. Because it has been designed as a generic
tool that takes into account a number of options, this version
of the term sheet generator is fairly expansive and includes
significantly more detail than would likely be found in a cus-
tomized application.
SAmPLE SummARY TERm ShEET
Securities: 	Shares of Series Seed Preferred Stock of the
Company
Amount of This
Round:
$1,000,000
Investors: 	Name of funds and amounts committed by each
Price Per Share: 	Price per share (the “Original Issue Price”),
based on a pre-money valuation of ______,
including an available option pool of __%
of the fully diluted capitalization of the
Company after giving effect to the proposed
financing.
Liquidation
Preference:
One times the Original Issue Price plus
declared but unpaid dividends on each share
of Series Seed, balance of proceeds paid to
Common. A merger, reorganization, or simi-
lar transaction will be treated as liquidation.
Conversion: 	Convertible into one share of Common (subject
to proportional adjustments for stock splits,
stock dividends, and the like) at any time at
the option of the holder.

-- 344 of 546 --

SAmPLE SummARY TERm ShEET 	315
Voting Rights: 	Votes together with the Common Stock on all
matters on an as-converted basis. Approval
of majority of Series Seed required to
(a) adversely change rights of the Preferred
Stock; (b) change the authorized number of
shares; (c) authorize a new series of Pre-
ferred Stock having rights senior to or on
parity with the Preferred Stock; (d) redeem
or repurchase any shares (other than pursu-
ant to the Company’s right of repurchase at
original cost); (e) declare or pay any divi-
dend; (f) change the number of directors;
or (g) liquidate or dissolve, including any
change of control.
Financial
Information:
Investors who have invested at least $____ will
receive standard information and inspection
rights and management rights letter.
Registration Rights: 	Investors shall have standard registration rights.
Participation Right: 	Major Investors will have the right to partici-
pate on a pro rata basis in subsequent issu-
ances of equity securities.
Board of Directors: 	Two directors elected by holders of a majority
of common stock, the right to elect one by
investors.
Expenses: 	Company to reimburse investors for fees and
expenses (not to exceed _____).
Future Rights: 	The Series Seed will be given the same rights
as the next series of Preferred Stock (with
appropriate adjustments for economic
terms).
Founder matters 	Each founder shall have four years vesting
beginning from the date of his involvement
with the company. Each founder shall have
assigned all relevant IP to the company prior
to closing.
Closing Date 	No later than 30 days from the date of this
terms sheet.

-- 345 of 546 --



-- 346 of 546 --

27
317
Buy Low, Sell High
Equity Preferred Stock
When any corporation is incorporated, the founders contrib-
ute capital and designate a certain number of shares. While at
the time of formation only one class of shares may exist, typi-
cally common shares, this may change when investors come
into the picture. Preferred stock is a separate class of shares for
investors, which enjoys control and financial preferences over
and above the common shareholders.
If the value of preferred stock grows, the ability to invest
additional amounts of capital, such as with preemptive rights,
helps investors maintain or build their position in a growing
company. If it sours, the ability to gain control (via management
changes), minimize the impact of downsides (via antidilution),
and attempt to salvage the remains of the day is important. In
reality, most practitioners agree that if any opportunity teeters,
not much can be done to resurrect the remains. In any port-
folio, at least a third of the investments will likely end up as
write-offs.
Structuring an investment starts with valuation primarily, fol-
lowed by liquidation and antidilution preferences (used to pro-
tect ownership), dividends, and rights of first refusal, or ROFR
(pronounced as rofer, which sounds like an angry dog). These
terms aligned effectively can help any investor (a) establish an
ownership position and (b) build up ownership as the opportu-
nity progresses. The lead investor, the one with the maximum
investment amount in the round, typically sets the major terms.

-- 347 of 546 --

318 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
The other syndicate investors have a choice — to accept those
terms or not — but seldom have significant negotiating leverage.
It is important to establish “middle-of-the road” terms.
Any exotic nonstandard terms will get cleaned up and rene-
gotiated by future investors and will impact the reputation
of the venture firm. In as much as 30 percent of subsequent
financing, new investors renegotiated terms established at
previous rounds. The most commonly renegotiated terms are
(1) automatic conversion price, (2) liquidation preferences,
(3) redemption maturity, and (4) funding milestones, vesting
provisions, or performance benchmarks.1
VALuATioN MeTHoDS AND oTHeR VooDoo ARTS
For those who have been in the business of venture capi-
tal long enough, many will ruefully reminisce about missed
opportunities — some due to high valuations, and others due
to timing.
Jim Bryer, when making the first investment in Facebook,
remarked, “The price was way too high, but sometimes that’s
what it takes to do the deal.” Accel’s $12.7 million investment
to acquire 15 percent of Facebook at approximately $100 mil-
lion pre-money valuation grew by 50X in six years.2 In hind-
sight, the price does not seem too high. Several investors had
passed on Facebook — the opportunity of the decade. Josh
Koppelman of First Round Capital missed investing in Twit-
ter due to valuation concerns. “We offered Twitter a term
sheet — $500,000 at a $5 million pre-money valuation.” But
Evan Williams, founder of Twitter, continued to fund it. Three
months later, Union Square Ventures led the round at a $20
million valuation. Josh passed on Twitter, saying, “We thought
the valuation was high.” 3
While valuation is one of the important terms for the entre-
preneur as well as the investors, no simple method exists to
calculate valuation at the seed- and early-stage of investments.

-- 348 of 546 --

THe DRiVeRS oF VALuATioN 	319
Valuation is primarily a function of market demand (hot
opportunity, must get in now) and capital supply. For the more
rational, valuation is a function of the sector, stage of the com-
pany, and the geography. Technology sectors often gain higher
valuations as compared to medical devices or biotech sectors.
In competitive geographies like Silicon Valley, valuations can
soar quickly. In regions that suffer from paucity of capital,
strong startups barely get what they deserve. Seasoned inves-
tors often think of valuation in simpler terms — instead of
overthinking the numbers, a typical “sounds about right” reac-
tion is often heard when numbers are tossed around.
Depending on the stage of the company, valuation can be
a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation, based on compa-
rable transactions, called “comps.” Let us wear our academic
hats and look at the approaches to valuation. However, bear in
mind that valuation is a subjective art at an early stage of ven-
ture investing, rather than formulaic net present value (NPV)/
discounted cash flow (DCF) approach. Aswath Damodaran,
author of The Dark Side of Valuation, writes, “There can be no
denying the fact that young companies pose the most dif-
ficult estimation challenges in valuation. A combination of
factors — short and not very informative histories, operating
losses and the . . . high probability of failure — all feed into val-
uation practices that try to avoid dealing with the uncertainty
by using a combination of forward multiples and arbitrarily
high discount rates.”4
THe DRiVeRS oF VALuATioN
Valuation is often a function of several factors:
• 	The opportunity serves an attractive market with higher
growth potential.
• 	The opportunity has an established competitive position via
execution, market dominance, and low number of threats.

-- 349 of 546 --

320 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
• 	A visionary CEO and a strong team — “an execution
machine” — is in place.
• 	The opportunity demonstrates strong financial metrics,
high growth rate of revenues, robust gross margins, and
efficient uses of capital.
• 	A meaningful exit potential within the target time frame can
be achieved: The universe of strategic buyers is large,
accessible, and actively seeks growth opportunities via
acquisition.
• 	Capital supply–demand drivers are in favor of the com-
pany and the sector/geography in which it operates.
Valuation of startups is much higher in competitive mar-
kets like Silicon Valley.
• 	Finally, the state of the public markets, frothiness, or
excessive capital supply, can often elevate valuations
across the board and trounce all of the above criteria.
• 	When 	companies 	underperform, 	or 	markets 	slow
down, down-round financings may occur. Try not to
lose too much sleep over down rounds — because once
you have invested, these are merely paper movements
and the only valuation that matters is the one at the
time of your exit.
For most investors, the exercise of establishing valuation
begins with the end in mind. What is the target return that
can be generated for such an investment? Valuation econom-
ics boil down to maximizing ownership while minimizing
dilution as well as anticipated exit outcomes. Exhibits 27.1
and 27.2 show how valuation is often driven by anticipated
exit values, often measured only by cash-on-cash multiples.
Recall that in the LP fund-diligence section, several LPs
described the importance of measuring both — cash-on-cash
and IRR.

-- 350 of 546 --

THE DRIVERS OF VALUATION 	321
3%
18%
29%
46%
0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50
Competitive Pressure
Desired Ownership
Comparables
Anticipated Exit
Exhibit 27.1 Factors for setting valuation.
Source: Based on Gompers, Paul A., William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. “How Do Venture Capitalists Make
Decisions?” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22587, September 2016.
9%
22%
42%
63%
None
NPV
IRR
Cash-on-Cash Multiple
0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50 	60 	70
Exhibit 27.2 Financial metrics to analyze investments: Cash-on-cash
matters more to GP.

-- 351 of 546 --

322 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
Consider the projections in Exhibit 27.3, which yield rev-
enues of $122.8 million in 6 years. Assume a multiple of 6.5X
generating an Enterprise Value of $798.8 million.
As you debate the valuation for this company, work your
way backward from the exit value and ask these questions:
• 	What should your ownership in this company be, at the
time of its exit? If we assume 10 percent ownership at
exit, it generates $79.8 million in proceeds.
• 	What investment amount and entry valuation can gen-
erate target returns?
• 	Assume you invest $5 million in a $15 million Series
A round, at $30 million pre-money valuation. Your
ownership is about 11 percent at the point of entry.
• 	What assumptions should we make for dilution at various
stages of future financing?
Let us assume for the sake of simplicity in this exam-
ple that no further financing or dilution occurs.
We model exit calculations to show:
• 	$5m investment generates $79.8 million or 12.8X
multiple of invested capital (MOIC).
• 	Assuming a six-year holding period, the IRR calcula-
tions yield 56.7 percent.
Exhibit 27.3 Enterprise Value Based on Future Projections.
$m 	Year 1 	Year 2 	Year 3 	Year 4 	Year 5 	Year 6
Revenues 	$9.6 	$21.1 	$37.01 	$59.99 	$89.70 	$122.98
Growth rate 	120% 	75% 	62% 	50% 	37%
Gross profits 	$4.8 	$12.7 	$25.9 	$41.9 	$67.2 	$98.3
Operating
expenses
$15.6 	$23.5 	$35.3 	$45.9 	$59.7 	$77.6
EBITDA 	–$5.9 	–$2.3 	$1.6 	$14.05 	$29.99 	$45.27
Exit multiple 	6.5x
Enterprise Value 	$798.8

-- 352 of 546 --

THe DRiVeRS oF VALuATioN 	323
• 	Are these return-expectations (of both IRR and MOIC)
sufficient?
• 	If variations in revenues and exit multiples were to
occur, and they always do, how resilient is the potential
for returns?
If we assume the comparable exit multiples drop to 4.5X,
how does that impact the returns?
Comparable Revenue
Multiple
4.5x 	6.5x 	8.5x 	10.5x
MOIC 	8.8x 	12.8x 	16.7x 	20.6x
Expected IRR (%) 	46.9% 	56.7% 	64.3% 	70.5%
Such a simple modeling exercise should allow any prac-
titioner to assess whether the investment opportunity offers
the expected target returns, and what expected ranges can be
projected. This model does not factor in dilution of ownership
across multiple rounds. The rule of thumb is to keep invest-
ing and building up ownership in winning companies at every
round of investment.
As one venture capitalist pointed out, “I expect each of my
portfolio companies to generate 10X or higher returns and make
the fund whole — getting caught up in discount ratios and valu-
ation techniques does not help. I seek the best in class and work
hard to make them the numero uno of their category.” Sir Michael
Moritz of Sequoia Capital once remarked, “We are in the busi-
ness of creating a large bonfire with a small matchstick.”
Establishing a price for an illiquid security, with significant
risk (management risk, market risk, technology risk, follow-
on financing risk) is nebulous activity. At the early stages of
investment, practitioners have honed the valuation process
to an art form, a subjective technique at best. When valua-
tion debates become prolonged, some practitioners consider
using a blended approach that diffuses valuation issues. These
include liquidation multiples and springing warrants, but
these can create complexity in the legalese and deal structures.

-- 353 of 546 --

324 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
For most practitioners, the ability to generate returns is
what matters. For each investment, seasoned investors seek
10X or higher returns. As most agree, valuation is just a small,
yet important, part of the overall structure.
While negotiating valuation, any practitioner keeps the fol-
lowing three variables in perspective: timing of exit, owner-
ship at exit, and target IRR. The timing of an exit depends on
several factors, both internal and external. Any rapid churn in
the management team, unforeseen uses of cash, and changes
in the burn rate will significantly affect the timing and value
of the exit. At times, investor’s tactfully force an exit, as they
need to demonstrate liquidity and performance. External fac-
tors such as competitive threats, plateauing of growth, or com-
petition can force an exit. The best scenario is, of course, an
unsolicited offer to purchase the company.
CoMPARABLe VALuATioNS oF SiMiLAR
iNVeSTMeNTS (CoMPS)
In the comparable valuation or comps method, valuation is
determined by comparable transactions in the marketplace.
Consider Exhibit 27.4, which shows a typical range of values.
The revenues and the acquisition price are estimated, as these
may not be declared or available publicly. A median and mean
multiple is calculated that indicates a range of multiples that
could be deployed in such a scenario.
In Exhibit 27.5, the universe of publicly traded companies
is assessed. Critics argue that the method does not factor in
Exhibit 27.4 Sample Comparable Method (Private Companies).
Company
Acquisition
Price
Estimated
Revenue 	Multiple
Tech Gizmo, USA 	$550M 	$50M 	11X
Maps-R-Us, Germany 	$225M 	$28M 	8X
Gemini Global, USA 	$155M 	$26.2M 	5.9X
Pan Premier, Spain 	$40M 	$2M 	20X

-- 354 of 546 --

CoMPARABLe VALuATioNS oF SiMiLAR iNVeSTMeNTS 	325
Valuation in 13 Short Tweets — Elizabeth Yin of Hustle Fund
@dunkhippo33 offers some advice to founders on early-stage valuation:
1. First and foremost, valuation is not actually about how much your
company is worth.
2. Obviously if you have zero rev and you have raised money at a $4m
post money, you are not currently worth $4m.
3. And using the public equities definition of market cap doesn’t hold,
either. A mkt cap of $50b in public equities is a reflection of how
much investors believe your total revenues can amnt to.
4. So the best descriptor of what I think early stage valuation is — it’s
just a supply and demand problem. Supply of your round and investor
demand of your round.
5. If you are raising say $200k and you have $500k of investor interest,
your valuation can be bid up. If you are raising $2m and no one is
interested, then your valuation is . . . well $0.
6. So it’s less about your “actual” worth and more about what inves-
tors want to pay.
7. One could argue, “Well, what investors want to pay is based on
what they think you are worth.” And that’s both true and false.
8. Where it’s true: the more proof pts you have per your idea, the more
investors will be interested, the more you can bid up the valuation.
(Most early stage investors weight how big an idea is >> traction.
But for two of the same idea, more traction is better.)
9. Where it’s false: let’s say that two funds are interested in the same
company. One is a $100m fund. The other is a $1b fund. The lat-
ter is willing to pay a higher valuation, because this round is an
option for the next. The former fund has to buy as much equity as
possible now.
10. 	So you can see that willingness to pay higher valuations is not just
about you as the company but also about the investor.
11. 	Another criteria is how valuable an investor is beyond money — a
past portfolio co had two terms sheets: one from A16Z and another
from someone else. In this case, A16Z was the lower valuation. The
founder took it because he knew they would be really value add.
12. 	Lastly, sometimes investors are willing to pay a higher valuation
to buy a logo or network w either the founders / investors in that
round. This has nothing to do w the details of the business itself.
13. 	So as you think through valuation — it’s less about how much am
I “worth” and more about a) which investors do I want to work
with? b) how quickly do I want to raise? c) how do I create a good
supply vs demand dynamic in my round?

-- 355 of 546 --

326 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
several risks, such as technology, market adoption, and liquid-
ity risks. Furthermore, the growth rates and gross margins for
each company are different.
While this method is used broadly in later-stage compa-
nies, it has its own set of fair challenges:
• 	The universe of comparable transactions may be broad. As
they say, with a large data set, you can draw any conclu-
sion you desire. When entrepreneurs present compara-
ble transactions, and when investors dig into the data
set, valuations can be surprisingly different.
• 	Lack of transparency. While the only data available are the
pre-money valuation, the data do not depict the finer
nuances of strengths and risks embedded within. For
example, valuation skews toward the positive when an
experienced entrepreneur may be leading an opportu-
nity. Other factors that may affect value are the quality of
technology and its attractiveness to customers or exist-
ing partnerships — these factors may be invisible from
the comps data set.
• 	The comparable data set in a frothy environment may not
be relevant.
Exhibit 27.5 Sample Comparable Method (Publicly Traded Companies).
TTM
Revenues ($m)
TTM EBITDA
($m)
Enterprise
Value ($m)
Enterprise
Value
(X Rev)
Enterprise
Value
(X EBIT)
ABC Technology 	670 	73 	1,323 	2.0 	18.1
Street Group 	433 	99 	1,220 	2.8 	12.3
Avalon Innovations 	1229 	114 	3,600 	2.9 	31.6
Sapphire
Technology
225 	45 	990 	4.4 	22.0

-- 356 of 546 --

DiSCouNTeD CASH FLow MeTHoD 	327
DiSCouNTeD CASH FLow MeTHoD
If you have a master’s in business administration, the DCF
valuation technique would have been drilled into the depths
of your cranium. Like most highly academic techniques, the
DCF is irrelevant for early-stage venture capital on a num-
ber of counts. For one, at an early stage of any company, you
really do not have comparable data, and the rest is projections.
Thus, I have seen entrepreneurs conjure up projections and
use extensive DCF models to develop precise valuation — a
healthy exercise — but at the end of the day, value is what can
be transacted up. A great model with multiple Excel spread-
sheets is helpful, but if a transaction cannot be consummated,
what good is all this idealism?
To calculate valuation of a firm using DCF, we estimate the
percentage of growth and the number of years of such growth.
The entrepreneur’s estimates and practitioners’ estimates on
growth rates can vary significantly. But let us assume that the
two parties agree upon a growth rate.
The second variable is free cash flows (FCF) available dur-
ing such a period. FCF seems like a novel concept when we
discuss startups and early-stage companies.
Finally, we assume a discount rate — you consider the ter-
minal value and those FCFs and pull them all together to the
present date. That rabbit you pull out of your hat is called net
present value (NPV) — a formula that is an amalgamation of
Options Trading
Early-stage investors can seldom predict whether an oppor-
tunity will grow, gain momentum, and generate returns. A
classic investment approach is to invest a small amount and
gain a seat at the table. It is similar to buying an option to
invest in future rounds. If the company grows fast, inves-
tors could maintain or build up their ownership position by
investing additional amounts in future rounds.

-- 357 of 546 --

328 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
four different projected variables — the rate of growth, the
time period of growth, the cash flows, and the cost of capital.
When all is said and done, you are trying to establish a
value for the existing assets and future growth. The approach
is well suited for more mature companies.
Startups have little or no revenues, no customers, and at
times, operating losses. Even those young companies that
are profitable have short histories, and most young firms
depend on private capital, initially, owner savings, and ven-
ture capital investments later on. As a result, many of the
standard techniques we use to estimate cash flows, growth
rates, and discount rates either do not work or yield unreal-
istic numbers.
Researchers studied the survival rate of almost 9 million
firms and concluded that only 38 percent of businesses sur-
vived over a five-year period. See Exhibit 27.6, which shows
the survival rate of technology companies, which is substan-
tially lower than health services.6 In fact, at least two-thirds of
technology companies die in five years, a higher mortality rate
as compared to health services. Thus, astute practitioners fac-
tor this survival rate in the valuation negotiations.
Damodaran suggests that besides using “a combination
of data on more mature companies in the business and the
How to Value Intel: Lessons from Arthur Rock
Bob Noyce called me one day and said, “We’re thinking of
leaving Fairchild Semiconductor to form a company,” and I
asked him how much money they thought they needed to
get started, and they said, “$2.5 million.” And I said, “Okay.
You got it.”
No — first, I think we first discussed the terms — how
much of the company they would be willing to give to inves-
tors for putting up $2.5 million, and we agreed on 50 percent.
Then I said, “Okay, you’re covered,” and went about
raising it.5

-- 358 of 546 --

LiQuiDATioN PReFeReNCe 	329
company’s own characteristics to forecast revenues, earnings,
and cash flows,” we should “adjust the value for the possibility
of failure.” 7 He further points out that multiples of valuation
should be considered at the point of exit, rather than present-
day multiples. If the revenue of a start-up after year 5 were to
drop to a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 10 percent,
the multiple should reflect this growth as opposed to, say,
50 percent CAGR in earlier years. This would create an
interesting conundrum where, besides revenues, practi-
tioners would try to project the exit multiple five years
down the road.
While this may not be adopted as easily, most practitioners
use a rule of thumb to assert valuation while considering risks
of technology failure, management churn, financing risk, and
illiquidity premium.
LiQuiDATioN PReFeReNCe
Mark Suster of Upfront Ventures says that the second-most
important term after valuation is liquidation preference.8
Liquidation preferences, often seen as an opportunity to
juice up the returns, are rights to receive a return before the
common shareholders do. These preferences come into play at
the time of liquidating the assets of the company. Liquidation
occurs under two scenarios: a sale via acquisition (presumably
a good outcome if the sale price is right) or shutting down the
company (and calling it a dog).
Exhibit 27.6 Survival Rate of Firms.
Sector 	Year 1 (%) 	Year 5 (%) 	Year 7 (%)
Health services 	86 	50 	44
Technology 	81 	31 	25
Financial activities 	84 	44 	37
Business services 	82 	38 	31
All Firms 	81 	38 	31

-- 359 of 546 --

330 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
From a negotiation perspective, liquidation preferences
have the following variables:
• 	Liquidation multiple. Defined as multiple of the amount
invested, practitioners set a multiple of, say, one time
the value of the original investment. This essentially
translates to investors recovering the amount invested.
The multiple is an indicator of market dynamics, and
while one time (1X) is the standard norm in a healthy
market, at times the multiple has scaled up to as much
as 10 times.
• 	Straight convertible preferred or nonparticipating. In a non-
participating liquidation preference, investors are enti-
tled to the amount they invested and dividends, if any.
That is it, they do not get anything more. Under certain
circumstances, where an earn-out amount has been
offered upon achieving certain milestones, investors can
get a higher return when the preferred shares are con-
verted to common. Thus, practitioners should ensure
they have the option to choose the greater of the two
scenarios.
• 	Participating preferred (or, as entrepreneurs call it, a
double dip). In this scenario, investors first recover
the amount invested, dividends, and the multiple
agreed on. The double dip occurs when the preferred
shareholders get to take a share of the common
shareholders on an as-converted basis. Market trends
indicate that about 50 percent of the transactions fall
in this category.
• 	Capped participation. A smart entrepreneur may have
invented this term, which essentially caps the return any
investor can get. A typical cap would be, say, 2.5X of the
original amount invested. Typically, about 40 percent of
participating transactions are capped.

-- 360 of 546 --

LiQuiDATioN PReFeReNCe 	331
As Exhibit 27.7 illustrates, liquidation preferences can have
a significant impact on the rate of return, but it is primarily a
downside protection mechanism for investors. At larger exit
values, these preferences do not have any significant impact on
the common shareholders or the IRR. These are just means of
protecting an investors downside when the exit is not as high.
If you are a Series A investor, and a Series B investor
stacks on their preferences on top of yours, the scenario could
get complex due to the misalignment of interests between the
various parties (two separate classes of preferred sharehold-
ers and common shareholders). Brad Feld of the Foundry
Group writes:
Exhibit 27.7 Liquidation Preference Stack and Its Impact on IRR.
Liquidation Preference 	4X
2.5X
Capped 	1X
IRR to investors 	87% 	84% 	81%
Multiple of invested capital (MOIC) 	12.2X 	11.4X 	10.7X
As with many VC-related issues, the approach to liquida-
tion preferences among multiple series of stock varies (and is
often overly complex for no apparent reason). There are two
primary approaches: (1) the follow-on investors will stack
their preferences on top of each other: Series B gets its pref-
erence first, then series A, or (2) the series are equivalent in
status (called pari passu. . .) so that Series A and B share pro-
ratably until the preferences are returned. Determining which
approach to use is a black art which is influenced by the relative
negotiating power of the investors involved, ability of the company
to go elsewhere for additional financing, economic dynamics of the
existing capital structure, and the phase of the moon.
Higher liquidation preferences = Demotivated founders
and employees9

-- 361 of 546 --

332 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
Excessive liquidation preferences benefit only the investors
and reduce the potential outcomes for common sharehold-
ers, including management and founders. When those who
are working hard to create value see that all they would get
is W2-like returns, the desire to perform and create significant
value diminishes. Feld explains:
An elegant solution to protect the founders could be the
founder’s liquidity preference. Although rarely used, it is
a creative approach to address the challenges wherein the
founders can wash out completely. “Creating a special class
of common stock for the founders with a special liquidation
preference is not typical, but it is an option that offers inves-
tors a great deal of flexibility and creativity,” writes attorney
Jonathan Gworek. This can be a win–win approach where a
founder’s liquidity preference creates a financial threshold for
the founders, especially if they have invested significant capi-
tal prior to any outside investments. Such a clause allows for
the founders to retain a floor, a minimum position for value
created by the entrepreneurs.10
Professors Colin Blaydon and Fred Wainwright, who head
the Center for Private Equity and Entrepreneurship at the
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth, write that “risk-reduc-
ing mechanisms were seen to be counterproductive — an
attempt to ‘close the barn door after the horse was gone.’”
The greater the liquidation preference ahead of management
and employees, the lower the potential value of the manage-
ment/employee equity. There’s a fine balance here, and each
case is situation specific, but a rational investor will want a com-
bination of “the best price” while insuring “maximum motivation”
of management and employees. Obviously what happens in the
end is a negotiation and depends on the stage of the com-
pany, bargaining strength, and existing capital structure, but
in general, most companies and their investors will reach a
reasonable compromise regarding these provisions.

-- 362 of 546 --

ANTiDiLuTioN PRoTeCTioNS 	333
They conclude, “the continued prevalence of a participation
feature in deal structures today indicates that the VC com-
munity either has less confidence in the potential growth of
portfolio companies or a lower appetite for risk. This sets a
precedent for terms in subsequent financing rounds” and that
the “VCs who funded the earlier rounds . . . will now have to
transfer some of that hard won value to the new investors.”11 It
becomes a karmic cycle, as a Series A investor tries to squeeze
the entrepreneur; when the Series B investors come in, they
love to jump in and do the same. Jack Ahrens of TGap Ventures
says, “It is best to avoid multiple liquidation preferences — it
becomes a rat’s nest and does not do anybody any good.” At
the early stage of investment, simpler is better. “You are bet-
ting on the market and the CEO — let’s not get too tied up in
preferences and such legalese when there are no revenues and
no product,” says Rick Heitzmann, FirstMark Capital. 12
Typical trends of liquidation preferences vary with market
conditions. Senior liquidation preferences are often seen in later
stage investment rounds. Later stage investors are risk averse
and often have lower ownership, and thus they demand better
preferences. In certain market conditions, when capital sup-
ply shrinks, or if the company may have struggled, liquidation
preferences as high as 5X preference have been observed.
ANTiDiLuTioN PRoTeCTioNS
Antidilution protection is a downside protection mechanism
that protects existing investors when a company is forced to
accept a down round, which is a lower share price compared
to what the previous investors have paid. Existing investors
receive additional shares, and their position is adjusted based
on the price of the down round. The common shareholders,
typically the management and founders, endure the maximum
pain in such circumstances. An investor-friendly term, it forces
the management team to retain value, execute on its mile-
stones, and ensure value is created in an effective and timely
manner. However, down rounds can occur with changes in

-- 363 of 546 --

334 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
burn rates (as unanticipated issues occur). Poor market con-
ditions could significantly affect a company’s ability to raise
future rounds of capital.
Antidilution provisions fall into three categories:
1. Full ratchet. An investor-friendly provision, this has
the largest impact on the common shareholders. The
full ratchet converts the price of all the previously
sold shares down to the price of the current round,
irrespective of the amount raised or the number of
shares issued.
2. Broad-based weighted average. A company-friendly provi-
sion (well, a true company-friendly provision equals no
antidilution provisions), this clause has the least impact
of all on common shareholders, as it is based on the
weighted average of the outstanding shares, including
options and warrants.
3. Narrow-based weighted average. The same as broad-based,
this eliminates the options and warrants and thus has a
lower impact on common shareholders.
The norm is weighted average (either broad-based or nar-
row-based), and thus practitioners are better off staying in the
middle of the road.
As Exhibit 27.8 illustrates, the impact of antidilution on
Series A would have been significant if there were no protec-
tive provisions. This is illustrated in the line “Additional own-
ership due to antidilution protection.” The full ratchet offers
maximum additional ownership, while the weighted average
drops the ownership proportionally. Notice the significant
drop in ownership for common shareholders.
Frank Demmler, who has participated in over 200 invest-
ments, points out that if Series A antidilution leaves little
ownership for common/management, the Series B investors
will have a due concern. Often, Series B investors will drive
renegotiation between Series A and management to find a
satisfactory middle ground. “The bottom line is that under

-- 364 of 546 --

ANTiDiLuTioN PRoTeCTioNS 	335
most circumstances, full ratchet antidilution protection will
be completely waived, while weighted average is likely to be
accepted.”13
So why negotiate for something that will potentially be
renegotiated anyway? Over 90 percent of the financing rounds
used weighted average antidilution. 14 These percentages vary
slightly as capital supply-and-demand conditions vary. It is
best to stick with weighted average antidilution.
Dividends
While most early-stage practitioners know that dividends are
neither expected nor declared by the board, the provision is
included in the term sheet. The investor-friendly language is
to seek cumulative dividends to juice up returns at the time
of an exit. The data trends indicate that about 40 percent of
Series A financings seek cumulative dividends. In some years,
as much as 80 percent of Series A financings sought cumulative
dividends.
As we can see in Exhibit 27.9, liquidation preferences, com-
bined with the antidilution provisions, impact the overall eco-
nomics significantly.
Pay-to-Play
Usually, this clause comes into effect when several investors
have joined the club, say at Series B, Series C, or later. The
Exhibit 27.8 Impact of Antidilution Provisions on Ownership.
Pre-round
Ownership
Full Ratchet
(%)
Weighted
Average — Broad
(%)
Series A preferred 	47 	17 	17.8
Additional ownership due to
antidilution protection
17 	13.2
Common 	43 	18.9 	19.8
Options 	10 	4.4 	4.6

-- 365 of 546 --

336 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
provision tries to keep the syndicate together and ensure that
all investors continue to participate in future rounds, espe-
cially when times are bad.
As venture funds of varying shapes, sizes, and motiva-
tions join the syndicate, it is likely that Fund A will not have as
much ammunition as Fund B. Or, Fund A may no longer align
with Fund B on the company’s exit potential, execution plan,
or business strategy. The pay-to-play provision would mean
that if Fund A is unable to invest more capital in the following
rounds for any reason, it will no longer be able to “play” and
gets kicked out, wherein its ownership is converted to common
stock, resulting in the loss of preferences and any substantial
economic upside.
Preemptive Rights/Right of First Refusal
Seed- and early-stage investors seek a right of first refusal
(ROFR) to ensure that they can maximize their upside. Thus,
when a company is ready to offer additional securities, the first
call would be placed to existing shareholders. In some situa-
tions, ROFR allows investors to purchase any founder’s stock
that may be up for sale. This tactic is used by early-stage inves-
tors who place a smaller amount of capital, and as the oppor-
tunity matures, they are able to increase their ownership and
take advantage of the potential upside.
Exhibit 27.9 Key Economic Terms and the Middle Path.
Economics 	Investor Friendly 	Middle of the Road 	Company Friendly
Liquidation preferences 	2× or higher, no cap,
participating preferred
1× participating preferred 	1X nonparticipating
Antidilution preferences 	Full ratchet 	Weighted average — Broad Weighted average —
Narrow
Dividends (as and when
declared by the board)
12% cumulative 	8% noncumulative, as and
when declared
None
Source: Adapted from Alex Wilmerding, Term Sheets & Valuations: An Inside Look at the Intricacies of Term Sheets & Valuations
(Boston, MA: Aspatore Books, 2003).

-- 366 of 546 --

ANTiDiLuTioN PRoTeCTioNS 	337
options and warrants
Stock options are incentive mechanisms granted to employees,
advisors, and consultants, while a typical recipient of a warrant
is an investor. From a VC perspective, both roughly translate
The Contentious Challenge — Right of First Refusal,
Super Pro-Rata, and Future Financings
Jeremy 	Liew, 	partner 	at 	Lightspeed 	Venture 	Partners,
reached out to Evan Spiegel, a Stanford University student
who had recently started Snapchat with a fraternity brother.
Evan’s father was tired of paying Snapchat’s bills, and Light-
speed promptly invested roughly $500,000 in Snapchat’s
seed round. In the terms, Lightspeed negotiated the right of
first refusal to invest in a future round and the ability to take
50 percent of the future round.
A few months after Lightspeed completed its investment
in Snapchat, another Silicon Valley venture firm, General
Catalyst, offered Snapchat $2 million to $3 million, putting
the company’s valuation at $22 million, but did not close
the investment, apparently due to the ROFR negotiated by
Lightspeed. Evan Spiegel would say, “When we took financ-
ing, our lawyers would take us through the documents and
they’d say: ‘Oh, don’t worry about it. It’s all standard.’ I’ve
since learned that standard means either the person who’s
walking you through documents doesn’t understand them
or you could be getting taken advantage of. When someone
says something is standard, just ask why, and why and why and
why, until you really understand how the deal is structured.”
Eventually, Evan struck a deal with Lightspeed, which
would be able to buy a limited number of Snapchat shares
at a discount. In exchange, the venture firm would remove
its ROFR clause and other terms that the Snapchat founders
considered onerous.15
Lightspeed’s investment of a total of $8.1 million gener-
ated 250X from SNAP at IPO — its equity was valued at $2
billion. 16

-- 367 of 546 --

338 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
to the same — they impact dilution of your ownership when
these are exercised. Fully diluted ownership means when all
preferred stock has been converted to common stock — stock
options and warrants have been exercised and any reserved
shares have been issued.
Employee stock options are offered as incentive tools to
attract and retain talent. Incentive stock options are used for
vendors, consultants, and the like. Typical option agreements
include number of shares granted, strike price, term and vest-
ing, and buyback provisions.
A warrant is a right to buy a security at a fixed price: the
exercise or strike price. Typically, warrants are issued in con-
junction with an existing investment — a security, such as a
convertible note or venture debt. For investors, warrants pro-
vide the ability to increase the overall returns. Investors can
improve their ownership positions at a suitable point in the
future, as the opportunity matures.
A typical warrant would include terms such as the following:
• 	Percentage of investment or amount of investment:
• 	Percentage of investment. If an investor issues a $500,000
convertible note with 10 percent warrants, the warrant
allows the investor to invest $50,000 in the future.
• 	Amount of investment. The warrant allows an investor
to purchase shares worth $100,000.
• 	Strike price:
• 	Nominal value. An example would be a value estab-
lished at, say, $0.001 per share. An investor-friendly
term, this would allow an investor to increase own-
ership at a certain point in the future.
• 	Share price of the next round. A company-friendly
term, this allows an investor to double up or
increase the ownership position.
• 	Term:
• 	Time. Term could be any time, say, up to 10 years; the
longer the duration, the better for the investors.

-- 368 of 546 --

ANTiDiLuTioN PRoTeCTioNS 	339
• 	Event-based triggers. Events reduce the life of the
warrant upon certain trigger conditions, such as
future financing or value creation milestones. Such
milestones reduce the overall liquidity that would
affect the founders.
Springing warrants
At the point of entry, valuation debates are the primary cause
of tension. Founders believe that the value of the com-
pany should be as high as possible. It’s a technological
marvel — future revenue and growth projections are just a
matter of time. For practitioners who have heard ample stories
and burned their capital, the skepticism is obvious.
For John Neis of Venture Investors, the answer was
simple — take the middle path. When the founders of Tomo
Therapies came up to discuss an investment opportunity,
Neis was intrigued, but like most practitioners, he looked
at the financial projections with a degree of healthy skepti-
cism. Typically, the struggle between the buyer and the seller
is evident, as each side tries to extract the maximum value
up front. Not in this case — Neis developed a structure of
springing warrants.
In this structure, quite simply, the venture fund’s owner-
ship decreases as the founders and entrepreneurs meet their
projections and milestones. A representative example is pre-
sented in Exhibit 27.10. It is an elegant model to balance the
ownership struggles and provide adequate rewards if the
founders meet their goals. The springing warrants are issued
to founders, and these are exercisable (at a nominal exercise
price) at certain milestones. The founders would thus acquire
additional shares of common stock based on a predetermined
formula. In the example in Exhibit 27.10, if the founders
believe they can generate revenues of $30 million in Year 3,
while the investors think it would be more like $23 million,
the two parties can converge the valuation today with the
assurance that as founders create value, investors relinquish
a portion of their equity.

-- 369 of 546 --

340 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
Tomo Therapies grew to $200 million in revenues in four
years of commercial launch and was listed on Nasdaq. For Neis
and Venture Investors, the largest shareholders, this invest-
ment yielded a solid outcome. In his modest style, John Neis
says, “Tomo’s technology saves lives — and bringing that to
market — was the important goal for all. The financial returns
are always a welcome byproduct of our efforts to change
the world.”
goVeRNANCe AND CoNTRoL: PRoTeCTiNg
youR SeCuRiTieS
All governance and control aspects in any term sheet are designed
to protect the ownership interests of investors (Exhibit 27.11).
Security ownership can be challenged because of internal per-
formance issues (poor performance leads to cash challenges or
lower valuation) or external financings (down rounds, debt obli-
gations). An investor attempts to manage these conditions by
controlling the board by governance and control mechanisms.
Consider the Series A investor in NewCo, who owns a
47 percent interest and thus is a minority ownership from a
control perspective. But special voting rights and preferences
allow such an investor to exercise control over key aspects
of the company. As described in Exhibit 27.11, typical board
approval items include the following:
• 	Officers and management hiring, firing, and compensation.
These provisions allow the board to select the CEO, and
if necessary, replace him or her if performance is lax.
Exhibit 27.10 Springing Warrants Can Be an Effective Way to Diffusive
Valuation and Performance-Related Challenges.
Revenues 	Year 1 	Year 2 	Year 3
Baseline revenues 	$5M 	$12M 	$23M
Upside case revenues 	$7M 	$15M 	$30M
Additional equity granted to founder for meeting
upside targets
3% 	5% 	3%

-- 370 of 546 --

goVeRNANCe AND CoNTRoL: PRoTeCTiNg youR SeCuRiTieS 	341
• 	Stock option programs. These have a dilutive impact on
the overall shareholders if an option pool is not estab-
lished. Establishing an option pool may require share-
holder approval. If an option pool is established, the
board would approve grant of options to key executives.
• 	Annual budgets. As the annual budgets are directly
related to the direction of the company and spend rates,
the board typically approves all major budget items.
Exhibit 27.11 Key Governance Terms — Those That Impact Control
of the Company.
Term 	What It Means
Importance to
Investors
Key Negotiation
Variables
Board
composition
Number of seats for Series A,
common, and independent
shareholders
Allows for control and
protection of security
Number of seats, how the
board structure can
be changed, rights of
preferred shareholders
vis-à-vis the rest
Board-approval
items
Board approves hiring of
executives, employment and
compensation agreements,
issuance of stock options,
annual operating plan,
and incurrence of debt
obligations or contracts
above a certain financial
limit
To protect the ownership
and equity, board
would approve key
business decisions
that may impact the
operations or the
equity structure of the
company.
David Cowan of Bessemer
Venture Partners says,
“As long as the ink is
black — if the company
is doing fine — I don’t
care much about control
provisions.”
Protective
provisions
Provisions allow for protection
of security interest.
Preferred shareholders
will approve
all changes to
securities, board
structure, mergers,
redemption of stock,
and amendments
to articles of
incorporation.
Most of these terms are
standard, and very few
practitioners open these
up for negotiation.
Employment and
vesting for
management
Keeps management team
focused on building the
business
Aligns interests of
founders and investor.
Includes employment
agreements, stock
vesting, restrictions
on co-sale, creation of
option pool, key man
insurance, noncompete
provisions
Source: Brad Feld, “Term Sheet: Liquidation Preference,” FeldThoughts (blog).

-- 371 of 546 --

342 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
• 	Debt obligations. Any secured debt creates a lien on assets
of a company and can be a drain on the cash. Under the
right circumstances of growth, venture-backed compa-
nies raise debt. The board would approve any debt obli-
gations to ensure they are aligned with the CEO/CFO’s
plans and performance.
Protective provisions included in the term sheet would
minimize any impact to the value or preferences of the security:
• 	Ownership/shares. Any issuance of stock would impact
the ownership and dilute current owners. Furthermore,
the pricing of stock, the amount being raised, and the
type of investors are all approved by existing investors/
board members.
• 	Mergers/acquisitions and co-sale. Investors and all share-
holders would approve such moves, as these impact
ownership and economics.
• 	Changes to the certificate of incorporation, voting, and
bylaws. Any changes in the corporate structure are typi-
cally approved by all shareholders and can impact the
powers of the board.
• 	Changes to board or election procedures. Existing board
members typically approve any changes to the board
structure (additions of seats, observers) that occur as
newer investors come to the table. Investors control the
board dynamics closely, especially in the early stages of
the development and growth.
eXiT-ReLATeD PRoViSioNS
These provisions come into effect at the time of the sale of the
company. As very few companies go public, savvy investors
do not invest too much time and effort splitting hairs around
these terms. For the most part, these are treated as boilerplate
language. A brief description of the terms follows.

-- 372 of 546 --

eXiT-ReLATeD PRoViSioNS 	343
Redemption
Certain practitioners are tempted to sell the stock back to the
company and redeem their investment at, say, the sixth anni-
versary. This provision is typically triggered when the com-
pany has made modest middle-of-the-road progress, but it is
not going to be a significant exit for investors. Unkind expres-
sions address these as the living dead. This provision implies
that the investment is more a debt-like instrument and attempts
to recover some or all of the investment.
Drag-Along Rights/Tagalong Rights and Co-Sale Agreements
These rights allow investors to “drag” the shareholders to an
exit. The dragging comes in when a specified percentage of
shareholders wants to sell the company when another group,
typically, the founders or common shareholders, refuses to
sell. The price may not be right, or they may see a bigger, better
opportunity in the future. The investors may have given up on
the opportunity and choose to get what they can. Drag-along
provisions allow investors to sell the package as a whole — if
any investor is unwilling to sell, it could block an exit, and
this provision allows the sale to occur. In tagalong provisions,
also called co-sale agreements, the founders or management
either give up or find a third party to whom they can sell their
shares. The tagalong rights allow investors to tag along with
the founders and offer their shares for sale as well.
Conversion to Common at Public offering, Registration
Rights, and Piggyback Rights
In the rare event a portfolio company is ready to file for an IPO,
all securities convert to one class: common stock. This allows
for smoother marketing and share price establishment. Thus,
the preferences established will vanish. In Venture Capital Due
Diligence, Justin Camp writes, “Convertible instruments allow
investors to take full advantage of the protections offered by
preferred stock . . . until they are no longer necessary, and then
allow them to forgo such protections. When investors invoke

-- 373 of 546 --

344 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
registration rights, they push the company to register the stock
or piggyback on other registrations. Once registered, venture
capitalists are able to sell their stock in the public markets.”17
Investors can demand registration, although several factors
come into play, primarily the revenues, growth rate, and state
of the public markets. Piggyback rights obligate companies to
let investors piggyback on the registration.
oTHeR iMPoRTANT TeRMS
These terms fall neither in the economic nor the governance
category but are important to align the interest of investors
and management.
employment-Related Terms
All founders and key management team members should exe-
cute employment agreements. Other important terms such as
stock vesting, restrictions on co-sale, key man insurance, and
noncompete provisions are included to ensure management
teams are aligned with the long-term goal of value creation.
Employment agreements clearly state a founder or manag-
er’s roles, responsibilities, and deliverables. These agreements
incentivize the team to stay with the company, especially
through tough times, and to create value. Stock vesting for
founders is often negotiated aggressively to ensure that after
the investment is made, the founders remain and continue
to add value to the company. A separate stock option plan is
typically created after investment and governed under the
auspices of the board. This plan determines the dynamics
of the employee stock options. Should an employee be ter-
minated, his or her ability to exercise the balance of options
will lapse.
Vesting for core team members can occur on a quarterly basis over
a three-to four-year period. Acceleration of vesting upon acquisi-
tion is considered suitable to reward management for having

-- 374 of 546 --

oTHeR iMPoRTANT TeRMS 	345
created value. The contention is amplified when founders quit
or are fired. The vesting debate can create a fair amount of
distraction and hence needs to be addressed in employment
agreements.
The restrictions on co-sale have been seen in a new light,
especially when founders are allowed to take significant por-
tions of their stock and liquidate it prior to a sale or IPO. Key
man provisions are methods of ensuring that investors are
protected if key management team members were to become
unavailable due to death or disability. 18 Noncompete provi-
sions can be enforced in certain states, but not all. The duration
(number of years) and scope (geography, sector) of the non-
compete agreement must be diligently negotiated.
The following miscellaneous conditions are prescribed in
the term sheets:
• 	Exclusivity and no-shop clause. This clause is included to
ensure entrepreneurs do not use the opportunity to get
an auction going or to find better terms of investment by
shopping the term sheet around.
• 	Closing date and conditions. This clause helps all parties,
legal counsel for both sides especially, to complete the
transaction on a certain date and meet any conditions
prior to closing.
• 	Nondisclosure, press/media. Ensuring confidentiality, this
is essentially an embargo on both parties to avoid mak-
ing any premature public statements.
To summarize, in a survey of 889 venture firms,19 as seen
in Exhibit 27.12, terms that are most important include pro-
rata rights, followed by participation rights and redemption
rights. As seen in Exhibit 27.13, when it came time for negotiat-
ing these terms, VCs rarely gave up their pro-rata rights. This
ensured they could increase their ownership of winners over
time. Interestingly, valuation and ownership stake were not as
important, likely due to pressures of getting in a hot deal.

-- 375 of 546 --

346 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
19%
27%
27%
45%
53%
81%
Liquidation Preference = +2X
Full ratchet anti-dilution
Cumulative dividends
Redemption Rights
Participation
Prorata Rights
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Exhibit 27.12 Terms that matter: Frequency with which terms are used.
Source: Based on Gompers, Paul A., William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. “How Do Venture Capitalists Make
Decisions?” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22587, September 2016.
2%
8%
17%
17%
20%
25%
29%
47%
0 	5 	10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Participation
Ownership Stake
Vesting
Board Control
Valuation
Anti-dilution
Liquidation Preference
Prorata Rights
Never gonna give these up easily
Exhibit 27.13 Flexibility on terms: VCs rank these terms as least
flexible.
Source: Based on Gompers, Paul A., William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. “How Do Venture Capitalists Make
Decisions?” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22587, September 2016.

-- 376 of 546 --

SyNDiCATiNg iNVeSTMeNTS 	347
SyNDiCATiNg iNVeSTMeNTS
An analysis of over 2,000 venture transactions shows that
syndication was found to be highest in biotechnology invest-
ments (in over 60 percent of investments) and lowest in the
software sector (with only 37 percent of investments). Syndica-
tion was least at the seed stages and increased in later stages.20
Capital constraints do bring investors together, as seen in
Exhibit 27.14, especially in biotech sectors where capital inten-
sity is significant. Past success makes good friends indeed as
seen in Exhibit 27.15 from the results of a VC survey of over
800 investors. 21
Whether seeking syndicate investors or being asked to be
one, the simple rule applies: Does the combined intellectual
and financial acumen allow for the better outcomes of the
investment opportunity? When inviting syndicate investors
into opportunities, look for complementary skill sets in syn-
dicate investors so that the combined power of the board is
higher in terms of value add. Mutual respect is important, as
is the willingness to come up with a solution that is best for
the company.
3%
24%
33%
39%
Future deals
Risk sharing
Complementary Expertise
Capital Constraints
0 	5 	10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
Exhibit 27.14 Most important factors leading to syndication.
Source: Based on Gompers, Paul A., William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. “How Do Venture Capitalists Make
Decisions?” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22587, September 2016.

-- 377 of 546 --

348 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
Those Clever Financiers . . .
I showed Tandem Computer’s business plan, which I had
mostly written myself, to all the local potential investors
with no luck. The investors’ rejection was based solely on
general worries over the companies in the field. They had
little understanding of the technical breakthrough we had
achieved and how difficult it would be for those competitors
to duplicate our effort and circumvent our patents. These
were financiers who maybe were clever with money but who
had no confidence in technology, the kind of investors who
relied on hired experts to tell them what to think.
— Tom Perkins of Kleiner Perkins
Caufield & Byers (KPCB)22
2%
3%
9%
16%
16%
25%
28%
Geography
Social Connections
Capital
Track Record
Reputation
Expertise
Past Shared Success
0 	5 	10 	15 	20 	25 	30
Exhibit 27.15 Most important factors for choosing syndicate partners.
Source: Based on Gompers, Paul A., William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. “How Do Venture Capitalists Make
Decisions?” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22587, September 2016.

-- 378 of 546 --

MiLeSToNe-BASeD FiNANCiNg: RiSK MiTigATioN 	349
Practitioners need to conduct due diligence on each other
with the same rigor they would apply to looking at new oppor-
tunities, but add a few other parameters to the mix: What are
the motives of the syndicate investor? Is it a true partnership?
Are their interests aligned? Do they have the ability to play the
long game and withstand the tremors?
Ideally, smaller funds would invite larger funds to partici-
pate with the optimistic outlook that as the capital needs for the
company grow, the larger funds will be able to lead the future
rounds. This can create a win–win situation for both funds. A
smaller fund generates the opportunity and acts as a feeder to
the larger fund. In turn, the larger fund can invest substantially
higher amounts as needed by the company. The smaller fund
needs to consider how antidilution and pay-to-play provisions
could affect the smaller fund if the opportunity does not pro-
gress as desired. The appetite for loss also differs with the size
and the stage of the fund.
Partnership of unequals can be challenging. As a practi-
tioner remarked, “I would hope that we would get an equal
ownership, but if Sequoia says they want 75 percent and we
keep 25 percent, we’d be happy with that.” 23 Syndication
caveat: As in life, so in the syndicate round, choose your part-
ners with care. The best syndicate opportunities are those
where every investor has the same terms and economic inter-
ests. As they say, we are family and we eat from the same
plate. Watch for investors who upsell their companies to you,
or worse, try to pawn off their struggling companies. And
finally, syndicate with the ones you trust will watch your
back and play a fair game — you know how they will react
in bad situations.
MiLeSToNe-BASeD FiNANCiNg: RiSK MiTigATioN
oR DiSTRACTioN
Staged financing is used in seed- and early-stage investments,
and the primary reason is to remove risk from the opportu-
nity. Completion of a prototype and customer validations are

-- 379 of 546 --

350 	Buy Low, SeLL HigH
a few examples of milestones that are typically used to struc-
ture investments. Recall Peter Thiel, who agreed to invest in
Facebook with the precondition that his note would convert
to equity after they reached a certain number of users. The
company did not meet its milestone, and yet when the time
came to convert, Thiel did not hold back. Staged financings
can provide incentive for the teams to perform and move
faster, and entrepreneurs can be assured that the tranches of
capital will arrive as the milestones are completed. But is it
that simple?
“Milestone-based financing forces the management to either
declare victory too soon, or worse, it distracts them from a
potentially bigger opportunity — in an evolutionary stage,
milestones can push the founders in the wrong direction,” says
Jack Ahrens of TGap Ventures. If you choose to use milestone-
based financing, consider the primary question: Can you dis-
engage if the milestones are not met?
Furthermore, the caveats are as follows:
• 	Definition of milestone. Avoid ambiguity and insist on
measurable and simple definitions. Instead of a broad,
complete beta, it would be prudent to identify the top
three key functions that the technology should meet.
• 	Amount necessary to reach milestone. If an entrepreneur
prepares the budget, a practitioner needs to ensure that
the resources, amounts, and line items are vetted. On the
flip side, if you squeeze the amount down, be prepared
to accept the blame: A common excuse from entrepre-
neurs can be “We couldn’t meet the milestones because
we did not have enough money to start with.”
As with most terms, flexibility, speed, and simplicity are
the keys to a successful start.

-- 380 of 546 --

MiLeSToNe-BASeD FiNANCiNg: RiSK MiTigATioN 	351
Key Takeaways
1. Focus on not just the price (valuation) but the upside
potential (probability returns) of the investment. If the
upside potential is significant, be willing to give up
some levers of control. In some high-growth compa-
nies, investors have bought common shares, with no
liquidation preferences nor any governance.
2. The single most important provision, after valuation,
is pro-rata rights. Ensure you can build up your own-
ership position in rapidly growing companies. Liqui-
dation preferences are standard 1X in most rounds, but
can be higher in later-stage rounds.
3. Minimize your negotiations around other terms, such
as antidilution, conversion, and drag-along rights, that
rarely come into play. It’s a binary game, where compa-
nies either die or have a huge outcome — everything
else in between is a distraction.

-- 381 of 546 --



-- 382 of 546 --

28
353
To approve the investment, any company follows these steps:
• 	Board approval of the investment via formal resolution.
• 	Majority of shareholders consent via vote.
• 	Execution of detailed documents that include:
• 	Share purchase agreement or subscription agree-
ment including purchase details, company’s repre-
sentations and warranties, board composition, and
voting matters.
• 	Investor rights agreement (IRA) including informa-
tion rights, preemptive rights, registration rights,
and affirmative and negative covenants.
• 	Affirmative covenants (or actions the company
should take) include maintaining the existence of
the corporation, paying taxes, maintaining insur-
ance, complying with key agreements, maintain-
ing accounts, and allowing access to premises.
• 	Negative covenants (or actions the company
should avoid) include changing the business,
amending the charter, issuing stock, merging
the company, conducting dealings with related
parties, making investments, or incurring debt or
financial liabilities.
The Closing Process
After the Term Sheet

-- 383 of 546 --

354 	The Closing ProCess
• 	Modifications to the certificate of incorporation to
allow for the new shareholders to be recognized as
well as to ensure that the company does not take any
actions that are not aligned with preferred share-
holders’ rights.
• 	Issuing of share certificates to shareholders/
investors.

-- 384 of 546 --

Part Four
355
Do VCs create value for their portfolio companies at all? If
you ask a star founder like Elon Musk, what answer might he
have for such a question? Word on the street is that in its early
years, Google board meetings were scheduled once every nine
months. This was to avoid the VC noise that’s often created
in boardrooms — product-market fit, scaling, monetization,
growth, and more. And the two VCs at the time were legends
in their own right — Kleiner Perkins and Sequoia, but still.
For one, founders with clear purpose, execution, and results
are a rarity.
Most founders are good at a few things and investors can
supplement their strengths in a number of ways. At earlier
stages, companies may need a lot more engagement, guid-
ance, and direction. This is where the upside is being designed,
directions are being plotted, and early market experiments are
being conducted. As the company grows and stabilizes, the
board’s involvement is mostly around staying the course, pro-
tecting the downside, governance, and reporting.
So how best can investors serve founders? The VC as
a coach does not always play out well, because the VC may
The Art of
Value Creation

-- 385 of 546 --

356 	PART FOUR 	The ART OF VAlUe CReATiOn
have never played the game. Or they played it in the days
of past, with wooden sticks when the modern-day CEO has
lasers. Their experience is not as relevant. The VC as a ser-
vice provider is another option, but the role of money and its
power dynamics can often create interesting challenges. Is it
our duty to nurture the team? Challenge them? Or monitor
and observe them without much interference, as they ride the
roller coaster? If done right, with a healthy, balanced culture
and thoughtful demands, the board can elevate the company
and the CEO. Value creation need not be a formulaic approach
to making a certain number of customer intros or helping hire
engineers. In some cases, it’s being present, when the CEO
does not know how to tackle a rough patch. It can be help-
ing the team overcome their fears and insecurities. But creat-
ing trust and engagement is not easy, especially when the two
sides may have differing agendas.
Many board meetings have caused elevated levels of pain
for all sides. This is often because the CEO is forced to prepare
an elaborate, 70-slide deck every two months. And then get
yelled at, or lorded over by five to seven people who may have
very little understanding of the business. I have seen situations
where some VCs take immense pride in catching the CEO off
guard in the board meeting, with a clever-by-half question.
Their goal is simple — to show how smart they are, so that the
other VCs in the room could genuflect with admiration. It can
devolve into an interesting theater, often at the expense of the
founder. That is more like value destruction. Or subtraction.
You get the point.

-- 386 of 546 --

29
357
“The biggest consistent irritant in the boardroom were co-
investors more intent on talking over management, rather than
listening to them,” Donald Valentine, founder, Sequoia Capi-
tal, would say. Echoing the sentiment was Vinod Khosla, who
spent his early investment career at Kleiner Perkins. “Most
VCs have not done shit . . . they have never been at a startup
or through tough times. Most VCs add zero value, some add
negative value while advising CEOs,” complains Vinod Kho-
sla, founder of Khosla Ventures.1
OVERVIEW
In a narrative account of a business, there is only one hero.
When we look at the plucky startup or entrepreneurial business
venture, the company founder or CEO is deified as a visionary
who forges a groundbreaking idea into reality against all odds.
In this account, the CEO is the captain of industry, creating a
dent in the universe with mighty volition and against all odds,
building a brilliant management team that works tirelessly
to craft the idea into a viable business. Cast into a secondary
supporting role is the venture capitalist. And most VCs do
not know how best to play this supporting role. How should
VCs understand their duties and, more importantly, draw the
boundary lines of their role as a board member?
VCs have often acted as egotistical overlords, pushing the
CEO and offering bad advice. Good role models are rare in the
Serving on Boards

-- 387 of 546 --

358 	SERVIng On BOaRdS
business of venture capital. Picking the right role models and
understanding their modus operandi is an essential part of any
self-development of an investor. No corporate governance
textbook can prepare an investor for the challenges of the board-
room. Having seen several scenarios of toxic boardroom behav-
ior, Brad Feld, partner at Foundry Group, and I co-authored a
book, Startup Boards, which helps board members and founders
manage the dynamics of a startup’s board of directors.
This section is a summarized version of board roles,
responsibilities, and, most importantly, guidelines on serving
entrepreneurs. An investor, besides providing financial capi-
tal, is expected to offer strategic guidance, access to business
relationships at every stage of development, while serving as
a board member.
At the most basic level, board members are expected to
adhere to duty of care, which calls for making prudent, informed
decisions, and duty of loyalty, ensuring that directors act in
the interest of all the shareholders. Above and beyond these
duties, investors are expected to support the portfolio com-
pany CEO in a number of ways — providing strategic inputs
where necessary, accessing networks of investors and custom-
ers, and identifying executives to build the management team.
The challenge, though, is knowing one’s limits and ensuring
that you are not a distraction in the boardroom, causing confu-
sion, derailing the management team while pontificating fan-
tastical theories, and destroying value. Or as Khosla puts it,
“creating negative value.” And in such situations, CEOs will
actively ignore your advice. One CEO put it succinctly: “My
strategy is to minimize the value subtracted.”2
Good governance is akin to parenting — lax behavior or
micro-management leads to dysfunctional kids. A board mem-
ber represents all shareholders — preferred and common, not
just their own “Series B preferred” financial interests.
A good board member first orients, then engages. Experi-
enced board members are adept at “pattern recognition,” where
lessons learned from various startups can be amalgamated to
ensure mistakes are avoided. Rookie venture capitalists often
stumble all over the boardroom, eager to display their acumen

-- 388 of 546 --

LEgaL REQUIREMEnTS OF BOaRd SERVICE 	359
(or lack thereof). It gets worse if they have arrived only with an
MBA, ready to divide the world into four magical quadrants.
The only training ground for the novice practitioner is the bat-
tlefield. Having a view of apprenticeship, knowing your limits,
and an attitude of servitude is better than an attitude of lord-
ship. Entrepreneurs have often described rookie board mem-
bers as “He learned how to be a director. We paid the tuition.”3
LEgaL REQUIREMEnTS OF BOaRd SERVICE
Fiduciary duties
Duty of care. Requires a director to act with the care that an
ordinarily prudent person in a like position would exercise
under similar circumstances.
Directors should:
• 	Obtain information they believe is reasonably necessary
to make a decision.
• 	Make due inquiry.
• 	Make informed decisions in good faith.
Duty of loyalty. Requires a director to act in the best interests
of the corporation and not in the interest of the director or a
related party. Issues often arise where the director has a con-
flict of interest.
• 	Where the director or a related party has a personal
financial interest in a transaction with the company (e.g.,
the inherent conflict between venture capitalists as direc-
tors and as representatives of their fund’s interests).
• 	Where the director usurps a corporate opportunity that
properly belongs to the company.
• 	Where the director serves as a representative of a third-
party corporation and the third-party corporation’s
objectives conflict with the company’s best interests.

-- 389 of 546 --

360 	SERVIng On BOaRdS
• 	Where the director abdicates his or her oversight role or
does not act in good faith.
Examples of not acting in good faith include the following:
• 	Consciously or recklessly not devoting sufficient time to
required duties.
• 	Disregarding known risks.
• 	Failing to exercise oversight on a sustained basis.
• 	Failing to act in good faith, which can have serious
adverse consequences to a director, such as being
exposed to personal liability for breaches of the duty
of care or losing coverage under indemnification pro-
visions or insurance policies. Generally, state corporate
laws have procedures for handling interested transac-
tions and corporate opportunities, such as requiring full
disclosure and disinterested director approval.
Confidentiality and disclosure
Board members need to protect all information and at times
push the management to share all material information with
the shareholders. Often, first-time CEOs do not know the
extent of information that needs to be shared. A prudent board
lead member and lead counsel can mentor the CEO. But the
judgment rule is one that needs to be exercised to ensure that
board members are protected:
Duty of confidentiality. A subset of the duty of loyalty.
Requires a director to maintain the confidentiality of
nonpublic information about the company.
Duty of disclosure. Requires a director, pursuant to the
duties of care and loyalty, to take reasonable steps to
ensure that a company provides its stockholders with
all material information relating to a matter for which
stockholder action is sought.

-- 390 of 546 --

SELF-EdUCaTIOn: PREPaRIng FOR YOUR BOaRd ROLE 	361
Business judgment rule. Creates a presumption that in mak-
ing a business decision, the directors of a company
acted on an informed basis, in good faith, and in the
honest belief that the action taken was in the company’s
best interests. The business judgment rule helps pro-
tect a director from personal liability for allegedly bad
business decisions by essentially shifting the burden of
proof to a plaintiff, alleging that the director did not sat-
isfy his or her fiduciary duties. This presumption and
the protections afforded by the business judgment rule
are lost if the directors involved in the decision are not
disinterested, do not make appropriate inquiry prior
to making their decisions, or fail to establish adequate
oversight mechanisms.
SELF-EdUCaTIOn: PREPaRIng FOR YOUR BOaRd ROLE
In early-stage companies, the business, its goals, and its chal-
lenges, complete with its cast of characters, are all visible.
The purpose of the pointers listed here is to initiate steps into
self-orientation and education. In addition to possessing a
thorough understanding of the history and evolution of the
company, any practitioner needs to consider the following:
• 	Develop a thorough 360-degree understanding of the
business, including suppliers, customers, competitive
threats, and replacements. The practitioner needs to
understand the cycle of cash and friction therein. This
is critical.
• 	Understand a company’s strategy and key goals. Over
the next 12 months and three years, how do you see
your contribution vis-à-vis issues and challenges facing
such a company? (“What would keep the CEO awake at
night, and how can I help?”)

-- 391 of 546 --

362 	SERVIng On BOaRdS
• 	Ensure you have relevant expertise to affect the stated
strategy. Prepare to impact the company’s challenges
and demands in a disciplined and consistent manner.
• 	Be aware of people and cash-related challenges. Does
the team need to be augmented? What is the cash posi-
tion, burn rate, and timing of next financing round?
• 	Understand the current board structure and how you fit
in this context.
• 	What are the board’s external and internal challenges?
Examples may include the following:
• 	External. Compliance with tax, civil, criminal, and
employment laws, any legal matters or share-
holder actions.
• 	Internal. Emotional and power dynamics between
board members, excessive churn of board members or
CEO, strategy du jour, product development, and mar-
ket adoption challenges, burn rate, and cash situation.
ROLES and RESPOnSIBILITIES OF a BOaRd MEMBER
It is well known that venture capital is the financial fuel that
kickstarted many great companies in the past decade, but there
is less familiarity with what venture capitalists do once they
sit on a company’s board. Beyond financing, what kinds of
support do they provide to startups? How do they use their
investment muscle to attract and win more capital? To recruit a
star management team? How do they winnow and champion
the most promising drivers from the rest? “As a board, your
role is to prove the business plan,” says Lindsay Aspegren,
founder of North Coast Technology Investors, “and your only
two control levers are the CEO and the budget.”
The primary role of any board member boils down to the
following:
• 	Shareholder value. Create, sustain, and enhance share-
holder value.

-- 392 of 546 --

ROLES and RESPOnSIBILITIES OF a BOaRd MEMBER 	363
• 	CEO selection and assessment. Evaluate CEO performance,
transition, assist in recruitment, succession planning.
• 	Governance. Manage risk via business strategy, finance,
management, market insights, and legal compliance.
The boardroom is where the venture capitalist wields the
greatest influence on a company’s future growth. Typically,
a company’s board is a group of people who meet periodi-
cally and provide advice and guidance on the direction of the
firm. For many startups and younger firms, venture capital-
ist board members are selected based on their influence and
knowledge of the industry to help companies make a clear
footprint on the market. Venture capitalist boards, therefore,
do a lot: they attract, recruit, and retain an excellent manage-
ment team and fellow board members; mentor and manage
the executive team; provide advisory services and expertise
outside the purview of the management team; and oversee
adherence to fiscal, legal, and ethical governance standards.
Brad Feld, managing director of the Foundry Group, points
out the simple role of any board member: “With the exception
of really two decisions, I’d like to think that we work for the
CEO of the company. The two decisions we really make are,
one, the capital allocation decision (do we want to keep fund-
ing the company?), and two, whether we keep and support
the CEO.” 4
The board expertise, attributes, and roles of the board mem-
bers shift as the company matures. Exhibit 29.1 demonstrates
the minimum attributes required as the company evolves
over time.
When there is ability and receptivity, any board member
should, in conjunction with the CEO, identify the value crea-
tion milestones. If the CEO is on target and plan, the best way
to serve is often to stay out of the way. Much damage has been
done with the intention of doing good.
There are innumerable factors in determining whether a
company succeeds — but none is as important as the role of the
venture capitalist board member. Austen Arensberg, investor,
says, “We need to be assertive and find a balanced, respectful

-- 393 of 546 --

364 	SERVIng On BOaRdS
way to support the CEO. How can we be objective in sharing
options? In one scenario, we discussed what happens if we can
raise the next round but we also had to be aware that we may
have to shut down the company.”
By their very nature, startups are not meant to be structured
in a top-down, hierarchical way. More team-oriented than
command-control, they must be managed from the ground up.
A more engaged and flexible board member, ready to embrace
and see opportunities in the challenges of growing a business,
can be an asset to the firm. The key is to balance the interper-
sonal abilities with skills in order to stay focused on those three
magic words: maximize shareholder value.
Exhibit 29.1 Attributes of Board Members Across Stages of Company.
Seed and Early Stage 	Growth Stage 	Path to Liquidity
Management
goals
Product development 	Sales 	Management of growth
Key metrics of
the company
Burn rate, time to launch 	Revenues, break-even 	Growth, profitability, and
gross margins
Evolution of
management
team attributes
Technical/product
development,
intellectual property
Operational, sales and
marketing, finance, human
resources
Management, investor
relations, legal
Minimum board
attributes
Relevant technical
expertise
Business/financial expertise 	Public company-like
corporate governance
Number of board
members
Three 	Three to five 	Seven or more
Culture of the
board
Experimentation, nurturing,
and openness
Expansion 	Control and efficiencies
Governance via
committees
Establish financial reporting
and financial threshold
levels; approval of key
legal and shareholder
agreements.
Establish compensation and
audit committee, name
formal board chairman,
and perform additional
financial and risk
reporting.
Name lead director,
establish public
company-like
internal controls and
practices, and conduct
Section 404 planning.
Examples of
board’s role in
value creation
Provide access to
scientific and technical
luminaries, identify
product development
guidelines, attract first
beta sites, and assess/
identify development
partners.
Advise on sales efficiencies,
accelerate customer
access, provide channel
partnership insights,
position competitively,
provide access to future
rounds of capital.
Maintain the course and
develop regulatory and
financial standards,
practices, and policies.
Source: Adapted from Working Group on Director Accountability and Board Effectiveness, “A Simple Guide to the Basic
Responsibilities of a VC-Backed Company Director,” white paper.

-- 394 of 546 --

ROLES and RESPOnSIBILITIES OF a BOaRd MEMBER 	365
We start with the belief that we can help the company, but
the most successful companies rarely need any help from the
board. Opportunistic investors often take credit for value cre-
ated by founders and prescribe blame to others for the failures.
At times, we may find ourselves at the end of the rope and can-
not do much, but we fail to admit it. Norman MacLean wrote
in A River Runs Through It, “So it is, that we can seldom help
anybody. Either we don’t know what part to give or maybe
we don’t like to give any part of ourselves. Then, more often
than not, the part that is needed is not wanted. And even more
often, we do not have the part that is needed. It is like the auto-
supply shop over the town where they always say, ‘Sorry, we
are just out of that part.’” Our goal is not to apologize — but to
strive mightily. To help the founders with the best of our abili-
ties. But knowing the finite edges of our universe is a sign of a
responsible, even a wise board member.

-- 395 of 546 --



-- 396 of 546 --

30
367
Although in the early stages of a company’s evolution, the
largest shareholders might dominate the board composition,
it is critical to structure the board with expertise necessary for
the company’s growth. If a board of a venture-backed com-
pany has five members — say, three investor representatives
and two management team members — investors need to ask
if they have the expertise to guide and help grow the com-
pany. “The board should have one expert each at the mini-
mum from sales, strategy, industry expertise, and marketing
areas. This allows for a balanced contribution, and the CEO
can reach different experts as needed,” says Rick Heitzmann
of FirstMark Capital.
While board-member orientation is critical, it happens in a
fairly ad hoc manner in most venture-backed companies. An
orientation is essential to ensure that members understand
their role and that they align their agenda with the overall
mission. Members may have differing agendas: investors may
seek exits at varying times, while the management team may
have a desire to build the company.
Board Culture
and Orientation

-- 397 of 546 --

368 	Board Culture and orientation
toWard a Better Board Culture
An effective board is active, one in which members know their
strengths as well as boundaries. Boards can be categorized as
active, passive, or somewhere in between. While early-stage
venture boards are predictably active, some board members
can be more engaged than others. In a small family of five to
seven board members, each member wields significant power,
which if misused leads to distraction and the destruction of
value. The cultural composition of any board includes the fol-
lowing five elements:
1. Trust. The ability to engage with the CEO and the board
members in a manner that ensures common interests at
heart, a level of transparency, and diligent actions that
promote the greater good of the company.
2. Communications. Does the board discuss harder topics,
challenge the management team’s assumptions, and act
in a nonthreatening and nonaccusatory manner?
3. Active engagement. Can the board members stay intellec-
tually and emotionally engaged and vigorously support
the company’s growth?
On-Boarding a New Member
A typical orientation meeting could be one-on-one with the
lead director and would include the following:
• 	Introduction of the current board members, if required
• 	Key goals and challenges of the company
• 	Board structure and goals
• 	Review of materials: handbook, policies, evaluation,
and committees
• 	Attendance and performance expectations

-- 398 of 546 --

toWard a Better Board Culture 	369
4. Alignment of interests. Do all the board members oper-
ate from a common thread of understanding — metrics,
milestones, and expected outcomes?
5. Independent 	observations. 	Have 	the 	board 	members
brought in an independent director early on, to ensure
that there is a balance between the CEO’s interests and
the investors goals?
Healthy boards espouse these five key cultural aspects:
1. Deep attention to details combined with macro views. The
ability to assess details and, at the same time, step back
and look at the forest through these trees.
2. Promote inquiry and dissent. The ability to challenge man-
agement assumptions and to act in a nonthreatening
and nonaccusatory manner.
3. Minimize the minutiae. The ability to organize the qual-
ity of information and discuss key issues, not irrelevant
ones such as leases and janitorial services.
4. Control the flow. The ability to focus less on packaged
information, leaving more room for open discussions.
5. Establish a collegial atmosphere. The personalities promote
open and honest discussions in a respectful atmosphere;
the CEO feels challenged but never threatened and is
viewed as an extension of this team. 1
Board member archetypes can fall into certain categories —
these create the fabric of the boardroom dynamics. The ideal
board member is one who combines the healthy aspects listed
above. The negative archetypes often fall into these categories:
• 	Authoritative pit bull. A screamer who dominates all
meetings, perpetually demanding higher sales revenues
and lower burn rates, bent on creating a culture of fear.
• 	An utterly disengaged, overstretched board member. One
practitioner describes this specimen as one who “starts

-- 399 of 546 --

370 	Board Culture and orientation
every meeting by asking what the company does.” 2 Not
reading the board package or being prepared for the
meeting is one thing; not knowing what the company
does is unpardonable. Like the inability to recall the
names of your own children.
• 	Passive-aggressive board member. Somewhere between the
overstretched director and the micro-meddler sits the
passive-aggressive member, who can do much harm by
manipulative behavior.
Experience and luminary status of other board members,
interpersonal relationships between board members, and
board–CEO dynamics define the underlying ethos. Like all
relationships, this fragile web has a finite life span. However,
the interpersonal dynamics of mutual respect and trust, pre-
paredness, the energy, and the work ethic of each board mem-
ber determine the duration of the relationships beyond the life
of the investment opportunity.
Honest self-assessment of individual members as well
as the entire board is crucial — eager beavers and passive
padres can never build a company, but in all likelihood, they
will promptly take credit for all successes. Irrespective of the
outcomes of the investment, the way board members engage
and support the CEO in challenging times often defines their
essence. As Andy Rappaport of August Capital noted, “A great
board cannot make a great company, but a bad board can kill a
good company.” 3 A badly functioning board can be character-
ized in many ways, but the fundamental shortcoming is not
performing the self-checks necessary to ensure that it stays
cognizant of the real-time needs of company.
Very few CEOs survive the travails of a venture-backed
company from seed stage to an exit. Like any relationship,
the visions and plans for a company’s future can become mis-
aligned between investors and the CEO. Harvard Business
School’s Noam Wasserman has labeled this situation the “par-
adox of success,” where during the course of trying to raise
money, the founder-CEOs “put themselves at the mercy of
capital providers, increasing the hazard of succession.”4

-- 400 of 546 --

toWard a Better Board Culture 	371
As the company grows, any skill gaps between the abilities
of the founder-CEOs and the organization’s needs widen pre-
cariously. Venture capitalists should be quick to dispense with
the unrealistic and romantic notion of the CEO who “goes all
the way” in favor of a proactive approach that involves a can-
did evaluation of the CEO’s strengths and weaknesses. Cracks
in the relationship between the CEO and venture capitalist can
easily lead to turmoil if not managed well.
A common mistake on boards in the venture capital busi-
ness, according to Promod Haque at Norwest Venture Part-
ners, is “not taking timely action to change a nonperforming
CEO for fear that it will rock the boat.” 5
Board members can also become vulnerable to manage-
ment spin on information, relying too heavily on their CEOs for
the details of the business. Venture capitalists who appointed
CEOs may be unable to offer dispassionate or unbiased criti-
cism of management actions or decisions. This type of depend-
ency quickly becomes dysfunctional and can lead to opacity
and misunderstanding.
Being a good board member is simple as long as the focus
is on shareholders’ value maximization. However, bad board
behavior abounds aplenty. Like dysfunctional families, each
board has its own quirks and challenges. But where a culture
of trust and open communication exists, the boardroom can be
a productive arena.
establish trust with the Ceo
Does the CEO know each board member’s strengths and draw
on these resources? Does the CEO feel secure and safe, dis-
cussing issues honestly and promptly? Does the CEO assign
tasks to the board members effectively? “I really struggled to
reconcile my role as a board member,” says Brad Feld. Brad
has formed companies, sat on boards and served as chair, and
taken a few of the companies public. “It took me a while to
firmly get my head set in one place where I focused on being
the investor rather than the guy trying to run the company. It
wasn’t my responsibility to fix everything in the company, but

-- 401 of 546 --

372 	Board Culture and orientation
to help the company win — I would provide feedback to the
CEO and work for her. Trying to direct the CEO or entrepre-
neur does no good for any venture capitalist.”
Build a Cadence of Healthy Communication
“The chairman’s statements were guarded — guarded by
enormous, labyrinthine fortifications that went on and on with
such complexity and massiveness it was almost impossible to
discover what in the world it was inside them he was guard-
ing,” writes Robert Pirsig in Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Main-
tenance. Communication between board members needs to be
anything but guarded and labyrinthine. It needs to be open
and frequent. The biggest mistake made by board members is
to presume that there is consensus at the board and not bother-
ing to ask others if they agree. If board members fail to commu-
nicate critical issues between board meetings, these can lead to
surprises as well as inefficiencies. A common tactic employed
is to discuss such surprises “offline” or delay the decision until
a consensus is reached. Such behavior hurts the progress of
the company, and very soon the CEO realizes that the board
is playing the proverbial fiddle while Rome may be burning.
According to A Simple Guide to the Basic Responsibilities of
VC-Backed Company Directors, 6 an open-door policy between
management and the board is equally crucial. Venture capital-
ists can share their wide range of experiences in other portfo-
lios to benefit a company, particularly during critical moments
of transition (e.g., when a company is about to consider an ini-
tial public offering). Venture capitalists can also give advice on
organizational planning and compensation structures. They
should also serve as sounding boards for their CEOs and carve
out opportunities to mentor them. This means making them-
selves available for broad-based consultations even outside
normal board meeting schedules.
As Brad Feld puts it, “With some portfolio companies,
the tempo of exchange is different, it could be daily — multi-
ple times a day. Some want to meet. It is always useful to get
face-to-face, but I let the entrepreneur decide the interaction.” 7

-- 402 of 546 --

TOWARD A BETTER BOARD CULTURE 	373
A VC survey (see Exhibit 30.1) shows that most board mem-
bers interact with companies multiple times a week.
A good board member invites and welcomes input from
CEOs, non–venture capitalist directors, and other board mem-
bers, including observers. Peer reviews and self-evaluations
ensure greater accountability and better governance. Effec-
tive board members also avoid the distractions of boardroom
intrigue and political maneuvering and focus on the opera-
tional goals of their roles: promoting the best interest of the
company and maximizing value for shareholders.
Qualities to be nurtured among members for an effective,
harmonious board include strong interpersonal skills to man-
age the team dynamics and the relationship with management;
pattern recognition skills to anticipate events and make tough
decisions, often with little information; partnering experience
to work with other investors with different financial stakes and
to manage board meetings without getting lost in the mundane
Source: Modified from Gompers, Paul A., William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. “How Do Venture Capitalists
Make Decisions?” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22587, September 2016.
1%
2%
10%
26%
27%
33%
Every day
Less than once a month
Once a month
2/3 Times a month
Multiple times a week
Once a week
0 	5 	10 	15 	20 	25 	30 	35
Exhibit 30.1 Interaction with portfolio companies.

-- 403 of 546 --

374 	Board Culture and orientation
details; strong networking skills to reach out to contacts in
the industry; and strong mentoring and hands-on consulta-
tive skills with the CEO and top executives to maintain open
lines of communication. One tool to foster openness within the
organization is to hold board retreats during critical junctures
in the development of the company. Unlike other board meet-
ings, the retreat can be used to address critical issues lingering
on the table with the help of an outside facilitator.
ensure alignment of interests
In any company, the cast of characters includes various classes
of shareholders, the management team, and the board. The
interests can vary across the axis of time, value creation, and
capital needs.
Any practitioner primarily seeks to maximize returns, and
thus timely exits are essential. Strong returns allow the prac-
titioner to raise the next fund and ensure longevity, possibly
higher fees, and improved brand stature. Conflicts can arise
when the following occur:
1. Career interests. A practitioner seeks attribution quickly
in anticipation of moving on to another fund, collecting
carried interest profits and seeking greener pastures.
2. Fundraising drivers. The next fund needs to be raised. We
need an exit.
3. Exit timing. A practitioner cannot see the growth tra-
jectory or strong exit value within a meaningful time
frame. The founders are caught in self-preservation
mode. Stalemate ensues.
4. Financial. This company is becoming a financial sink-
hole and the practitioner has “checked out.” Brad says,
“Alignment does not matter when a company grows
fast or craters quickly — you need alignment with the
portfolio companies that are stuck in the middle.”
The role of an independent director can alleviate any vested
behavior. “Allocating a tie-breaking vote to an unbiased arbiter

-- 404 of 546 --

toWard a Better Board Culture 	375
commits the entrepreneur and venture capitalists to more reason-
able behavior and can reduce the opportunism that would result if
either party were to control the board,” writes Brian Broughman.8
Experts studied over 200 investments in over 100 compa-
nies and found that venture capitalists control board seats in
25 percent of the cases, the founders in 14 percent of the cases,
and neither controlled the board in 61 percent of the cases. 9 In those
61 percent, the independent director acted as an adjudicator
and likely brought the two sides to a common ground.
Various studies and anecdotal assessments show that inde-
pendent directors were known by both parties in as many as 70
percent of the investments. Independent directors are brought
in because they have the mutual respect of both the company
and the investors, their behavior is objective and balanced, and
they have strong reputations.
avoid Complacency
In the beginning, a venture company gets by on the momen-
tum of an exciting idea or concept. It is not unlike a heady
romance, where the founder, who is consumed by passion for
an idea, meets a venture capitalist interested in investing and
taking the company forward. Their courtship is mostly driven
by the CEO’s charisma, technical expertise, and deep and nar-
row ambition. The board offers a steadying foundation. Andy
Rappaport of August Capital observes that “a CEO has to be
a person who . . . focuses on one issue, a single set of objec-
tives,” while a venture capitalist board member is someone
“who likes to take a broad view,” which “provides a check and
balance” to the CEO’s intensity.10
For any portfolio company, venture capitalists should have
an understanding of the company’s competitive position in
the industry to help it stay nimble and to make inroads in the
market. Venture capitalists are expected to keep abreast of spe-
cific industry developments, as well as the current regulatory
environment, to maintain oversight of rules and regulations,
and to understand the governance requirements throughout
the development of the company.

-- 405 of 546 --

376 	Board Culture and orientation
on-BoardinG CHeCKliSt
The following orientation materials can be offered to a new
board member, if and as needed:
• 	Company overview:
• 	Business background, management team, and
organization chart
• 	Directors’ biographies, listing, and contact
information
• 	Financial reports and projections
• 	Capitalization table
• 	Board policies:
• 	Conduct expectations, skills, knowledge, expertise
of each board member
• 	Frequency of meetings
• 	Establishment process of committees: audit, com-
pensation, governance
• 	Decision-making procedures
• 	Policy on observer roles
• 	Legal responsibilities
• 	Liabilities and insurance coverage, indemnifica-
tion, confidentiality, conflict of interest matters, and
resolution
• 	Media and press policies
• 	Board committees:
• 	Description (audit, governance, and compensation
committees, are typically formed)
• 	Composition, chaired by, purpose, and authority of
each committee
• 	Board self-evaluation process

-- 406 of 546 --

31
377
VCs want to be helpful, but in that delusional arrogance (or
neediness) they assume that everyone is groveling at their
knees, seeking their help, while they sit on a high throne dis-
pensing nuggets of wisdom. Now we have @vcstarterkit — a
parody Twitter account ensuring that we don’t do dumb stuff
all day (like end every call with that annoying line, “Let me
know how I can be helpful”).
Source: vcstarterkit
Let Me Know How
I Can Be Helpful: Value
Creation

-- 407 of 546 --

378 	Let Me Know How I Can Be HeLpfuL: VaLue CreatIon
As a board member, the best way to create value is to align
closely the company’s CEO, understand the key milestones,
and support the short-term value drivers. For early-stage com-
panies, these may be helping build the team or achieving prod-
uct-market fit and early customer engagement. As the product
gets ready for launch, access to beta sites or first customers
takes priority. Risk mitigation is interwoven at all stages,
with ongoing threats from competitors or substitutes. As the
company grows, access to follow-on financial resources and
scaling for growth becomes important. Finally, enabling exit
negotiations requires the ability to align all stakeholders and
ensure positive outcomes. Several variables affect this complex
interplay, including the stage of the company, the CEO’s ability
and comfort in engaging the board, constitution of the board
members and their skills, and investor alignment.
“The best VCs know how to market their companies really
well to create a reality distortion field that can often become a
self-fulfilling prophecy. Like the best managers, the best VCs
help founders amplify strengths and defend against weak-
nesses, as opposed to trying to mold them into some ideal-
ized entrepreneur based on pattern matching,” says Matthew
Tamayo-Rios, a Silicon Valley founder backed by some of the
leading venture investors.
Board members can support the CEO of a portfolio com-
pany in all major business matters, including:
• 	Talent attraction
• 	Revenue growth
• 	Business strategy
• 	Industry knowledge, insights, and strategic
relationships
“The only reason top-tier venture capitalists invite you to
coinvest is because of your ability to add value — be it your
domain expertise or your network of contacts. You have to win
their respect and gain confidence to be invited to participate

-- 408 of 546 --

GooD GoVernanCe aS tHe fIrSt Step towarD 	379
in the future deals,” says Lip-Bu Tan of Walden International.
A board becomes a stage where relationships are forged.1
PricewaterhouseCoopers conducted a study of over 350
companies that had received seed or first-round financing 2 and
identified three value-creation metrics:
1. Strategy. Market size, competitive position, and busi-
ness model.
2. Resources. Cash flow, investor value contributed, and
strength of management team.
3. Performance. Product development, channels/alliances,
and customer acquisition.
Companies that grew rapidly and successfully attracted
customers, built distribution channels, achieved healthy cash
flow, and seized a strong competitive position very early
became strong IPO outcomes while companies that were
acquired had gradual ramp-up on product development, cus-
tomer acquisition, and channel development.
GooD GoVernanCe aS tHe fIrSt Step towarD
VaLue CreatIon
A McKinsey survey of over 2,500 directors and officers con-
cluded that institutional investors are willing to pay a 14 per-
cent premium for shares of a well-governed company.3 On the
On Value Creation
Andreessen Horowitz has an in-house market develop-
ment team, which invites Fortune 1000 corporations, and the
fund’s portfolio companies to pitch products and develop
business relationships. The firm does over a thousand such
meetings a year.

-- 409 of 546 --

380 	Let Me Know How I Can Be HeLpfuL: VaLue CreatIon
flip side, poor governance translates to failed investments and,
even worse, lawsuits.
Depending on the stage of venture investments, the role
of directors is amplified in areas such as value identification,
value enhancement, sustaining momentum, and risk mitiga-
tion. The concept of value is unique to each company’s stage
of evolution. Exploring the fit between the company’s needs
and the investor’s expertise starts with the primary driver:
capital. An investor “buys” their board seat and attempts to
ensure value enhancement by offering intellectual and social
capital.
Board Best Practices
Establish the following practices to ensure healthy board
dynamics:
1. Engagement. Encourage the CEO to provide an annual
board calendar that includes frequency of meetings, an
annual strategy session where you can “go deep” and
assess the company’s progress and prepare a road map
for the next 12 months.
2. Preparation. Read the board materials ahead of time.
Besides agenda and minutes, emphasis is always
placed on
Business progress. Depending on the stage and evo-
lution of the business, an overview could include the
following:
Progress against key milestones. Highlight delays and
develop countermeasures.
Product 	development 	road 	map. 	Present 	completed
alpha, beta, pilot customer trials as well as future
road maps.
Sales and marketing. Pipeline, actual versus plan perfor-
mance, gross margins, lead generation metrics.
Financial status highlights. Provide the cash position and
burn rate, cash-zero date, variations against budget.

-- 410 of 546 --

tHe Ceo’S perSpeCtIVe on Venture CapItaLISt VaLue aDD 	381
tHe Ceo’S perSpeCtIVe on Venture
CapItaLISt VaLue aDD
In an informal study, founders of venture capital–backed com-
panies were asked to value the contributions of their venture
capitalist counterparts.4
CEOs value contributions with respect to:
1. Financings, advice, and introductions.
2. Strategic focus.
3. Recruiting and hiring senior management — CEOs
and VPs.
The areas where venture capitalists were least valued
include the following:
• 	Selection of professionals, law, patent, accounting
• 	Strategic relations with other companies
• 	Functional advice in marketing, engineering
VCs believe and indeed invest a lot of time in “strategic
guidance” with portfolio companies. Yet this can be an over-
arching term, often used to hide low-impact or even bad
behavior. The best value a VC can bring to any CEO is connec-
tions to other investors.
3. Follow-up/recordkeeping: Begin board meetings by ensur-
ing action items of the previous meetings were followed
through. Ensure accountability, both with the CEO as
well as other board members. The secretary of the com-
pany or legal counsel often records the minutes of all
board meetings. Generally, these minutes are brief, fac-
tual statements that state the resolutions and outcomes.
Records such as board books, minutes, and resolutions
are important diligence materials, often needed in legal
and acquisition-related discussions.

-- 411 of 546 --

382 	Let Me Know How I Can Be HeLpfuL: VaLue CreatIon
The challenge around rookie practitioners who do not
have 	entrepreneurial 	background 	is 	widespread 	among
boards. “I have seen situations where relatively junior board
members get too caught up in what-if analysis and demand
that the CEO prepare these unnecessary scenarios — what if a
meteor hits the earth and such,” says Rick Heitzmann of First-
Mark Capital.
20%
46%
58%
65%
69%
72%
87%
Other
Hire employees
Hire board members
Operational Guidance
Connect customers
Connect investors
Strategic Guidance
Activities with portfolio companies
0 	10 	20 	30 	40 	50 	60 	70 	80 	90 	100
Exhibit 31.1 Value creation: VC activities in portfolio companies.
Hands Off
In a survey of over 150 CEOs, 58 percent said they want
to work with venture capital firms that are entrepreneur
friendly and collaborative . . . BUT they are wary of firms that
are too hands-on. Only 1 percent said “hands-on” was an impor-
tant quality.5
Source: Based on Gompers, Paul A., William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev. “How Do Venture Capitalists Make
Decisions?” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22587, September 2016.

-- 412 of 546 --

tHe Ceo’S perSpeCtIVe on Venture CapItaLISt VaLue aDD 	383
Another survey of over 300 companies shows that the best
value a board member can offer is to assist with future financ-
ing. According to CEOs surveyed, lack of industry knowledge
and inability to make meaningful time commitments were
identified as the top two weaknesses of boards.
Aydin Senkut of Felicis Ventures says, “I think portfolio
value-add can be more strategic than just a function of time
spent — for instance we have been able to help founders where
it really matters — making a connection that resulted in an exit
or to find that critical executive. Those valuable connections
can sometimes be achieved with a mere 30-minute phone call,
but it could be transformative in value.”
Free wristbands for VCs trying to be helpful. Source: Shrug Capital

-- 413 of 546 --

384 	Let Me Know How I Can Be HeLpfuL: VaLue CreatIon
Effective Board Meetings, the Sequoia Capital Way
The following is a summary of Sequoia Capital’s thoughts
and advice to founders on structuring the first few board
meetings at early-stage startups. The underlying theme is
clear: Board meetings are all about solving problems for the
CEO.
While we focus on “decks,” it’s important to note: Board
decks don’t actually have to be decks. You could use Amazon-
style “memos” that communicate the same information
through text. It really comes down to the most efficient
and effective mode of communication for the management
team.
Prepare just enough. The goal of a board meeting should
be to maximize the value the founder gets while minimiz-
ing the amount of time you spend preparing. Of course, if
the founder doesn’t prepare at all, they’ll have a hard time
keeping your board focused. That’s why a good board deck
is so important. It may sound odd that the presentation can
contribute so much to the success of a board meeting. But
consider this: A board’s job is to give advice, help solve problems,
reinforce best practices, and so on. When all of this is on topic, it
can help guide you through the company-building process.
When board members are left to explore whichever topics
they choose . . . look out.
Focus on calibration. The primary difference between
company meetings and board meetings is that your employ-
ees spend every day at your company, which even the most
committed board members can’t do. That means you’ll need
to effectively and efficiently calibrate your board every time
you meet. Hopefully, you invited these people to your board
because they have relevant experience in areas where you
need help. The calibration will be worth the effort if it ena-
bles you to leverage the skills and experience in the room to
help you think through problems in a different way.

-- 414 of 546 --

tHe Ceo’S perSpeCtIVe on Venture CapItaLISt VaLue aDD 	385
Take a step back. Preparing a board deck is also an oppor-
tunity for the founders to take a big step back. This is incred-
ibly important to do. And if you don’t, no one else will. Treat
board meeting prep as an opportunity to pull yourself out
of the day to day and take a look at your company as if you
were sitting on the moon viewing the earth: Are you execut-
ing? Are you innovating? Are you hiring? Are you building a
management team? Are you growing the customer base? Are
you doing so according to the last plan you laid out? And
is that plan still good enough to win, or do you need a new
plan and new targets?
Don’t overthink it. This may sound like a significant
undertaking for a three-hour meeting that happens four to
six times per year — and it definitely is if you build a pres-
entation from scratch every time. It’s important, instead, to
report to the board leveraging the materials you use to run
the company. The Holy Grail is a board pack that is assem-
bled by your assistant who simply prints the cover sheet(s)
from weekly management-team reports and staples them
together. Then you have no overhead and, even better, per-
fect alignment between the board and the management
team.
Share materials early. Distribute the board materials
one to two days in advance and ask your board members to
study the material ahead of time so you can spend the meet-
ing discussing rather than presenting.
Structure the meeting. Following is a general structure
(see Exhibit 31.2) for an early board meeting/deck. We’ve
seen our founders riff on this, and you can see some feed-
back from those CEOs below. In fact, Dropbox — where we
partnered from the seed stage — has used this basic format
from those early days onward, even as a public company
today.

-- 415 of 546 --

386 	Let Me Know How I Can Be HeLpfuL: VaLue CreatIon
Industry expertise as a Value Driver
Industry knowledge, sector/domain expertise — the terms mean
more or less the same in the venture business. Some prac-
titioners have built their expertise by doing — starting
companies — while others have gained awareness by observ-
ing — reading about trends and discussing opportunities
with sector experts. The CEO of a portfolio company does
not care as long as a practitioner is able to deliver tangible
elements.
Running an effective board meeting
15
MINUTES
45–60
MINUTES
15
MINUTES
30
MINUTES
30
MINUTES
Topic 2
Topic 1
15
MINUTES
Formalities, stock option grants, etc.
5 Closed session
4 Working sessions
3 Company Building
2 Calibration
1 Big Picture
Deep dive on quarterty company goals, product challenges
Deep dive: functional area, large partneship opportunity, business challenge
Org Chart, Product Roadmap, Quality. Updates from teams: Engineering &
Tech Growth, Marketing, Business Deveopment, Operations, Quarterly P&L,
Monthly waterfalls
Funnel metrics, Engagement metrics, Financial metrics, Performance vs Plan
CEO Update, Highlights, Challenges, Discuss company needs
Exhibit 31.2 Effective Board Meeting — From Big Picture to Deep Dives.
Source: Sequoia Capital

-- 416 of 546 --

tHe Ceo’S perSpeCtIVe on Venture CapItaLISt VaLue aDD 	387
David Cowan of Bessemer Venture Partners was an expert
on web security and has successfully morphed his expertise
into other domains. “Over the years, Bessemer has made
a number of investments in the Software as a Service (SaaS)
arena. Our investments and knowledge within this arena has
led to creation of unique metrics that are significant value driv-
ers. We offer these to all our SaaS portfolio companies, and it
helps them to assess their own performance vis-à-vis the rest
of the SaaS universe,” says David.
Customer relationships as a Value Driver
Any venture-backed company needs rapid access to potential
customers and vendors. A practitioner with a strong Rolodex
can reduce some of this friction. “With one of our portfolio
companies, I arranged and participated in at least 15 customer
meetings in the first 12 months of our Series A investment. To
get access to decision makers quickly is important for start-
ups — essentially, you are accelerating the time to market.”
Lip-Bu emphasizes that a practitioner ought to be able to play
a role in every stage of evolution — product planning, cus-
tomer acquisition, manufacturing, and organizational devel-
opment. However, a rookie practitioner can make a classic
mistake of digging too deep. A mistake I have made too often
is to assess the pipeline and challenge the CEO on the prob-
abilities and timing of the sales. This becomes an exhaust-
ing affair for both parties and yields little positive outcome.
Rather, a practitioner should understand the sales dynamics,
as Ravi Mohan of Shasta Ventures suggests. “I recall my first
board meeting where I wanted to conduct a review of the
sales pipeline. It is a very common mistake and a low-level
tactical move. I am now better in serving my CEOs by focus-
ing on the high-level quarterly goals and by understanding
the sell cycle, customers’ buying motivations, and any fric-
tion therein. It is important to use the board meetings wisely
so that the CEO can get the benefit of the board’s time and
intellect.”

-- 417 of 546 --

388 	Let Me Know How I Can Be HeLpfuL: VaLue CreatIon
Business Strategy as a Value Driver
“One of the companies I invested in originally planned to
develop a product — I convinced its leaders to build a ser-
vices company. It was pretty clear that a services model would
function efficiently and solve the problem the company was
attempting to tackle,” says Todd Dagres, founder of Spark
Capital.6 Todd got involved with the founders at a very early
stage and helped shape the key elements of the company’s
business model. The company eventually went on to grow
over $800 million in revenues.
As Brad Feld correctly points out, “Every CEO and com-
pany’s needs are different, and there is no formulaic approach
to value add. It is highly customized. A lot of VCs have a play-
book of how they are going to add value. They are always ask-
ing for information — constantly probing and pushing, but
never turning around and saying — let me help you solve that
problem. It becomes a very time-consuming affair for the CEO,
and it’s a very selfish act on the part of the venture capital-
ists.” If done right, it is the most rewarding part of a VC career.
When I asked Pat Grady, partner at Sequoia for 12 years, on
what keeps him going after all these years, he recalled an event
that occurred several years ago. “It was a celebratory dinner
with the founder of a company that had just gone public. He
pulled me aside and said, “This is all because of you. Thank you.”
Work Product as a Value Driver
“During my early years, one of the CEOs of our portfolio
company was in my face saying ‘Hey, look, when have you
done this before?’ and my response was honest — I have not
run a company before, but let me share a specific example.
I described how I had developed a marketing campaign for
a certain product line and its strong impact on sales.” Pro-
viding a tangible example and supporting it with numbers
helped Brent Ahrens of Canaan Partners to build a strong
relationship with the CEO.

-- 418 of 546 --

tHe Ceo’S perSpeCtIVe on Venture CapItaLISt VaLue aDD 	389
But I was really supporting a senior partner who did most of
the work. . . . Yet that CEO was so generous in his remark. That
is a reward I carry with me — it keeps me going. Our purpose
is noble — we can help founders to build great businesses,
with enduring advantage.”

-- 419 of 546 --



-- 420 of 546 --

32
391
Challenges
in the Boardroom
“The fundamental cause of the trouble is that in the modern
world, the stupid are cocksure while the intelligent are full of
doubt,” philosopher and mathematician Bertrand Russell once
wrote. And this battle of stupid and intelligent plays out in the
boardroom at all levels. Between CEOs and VCs — between
big-dog Type A VCs and other moderately chilled out VCs.
Arthur Rock resigned from the board of Apple when “Apple
took a two-page ad in every newspaper you could think of,
announcing that they were ready to ship the PowerPC, which
I did not know they were going to manufacture — but that’s
not important — but that they were going to kill Intel. Liter-
ally — that’s what it said. At that point, I resigned.”1 Yet it
was the same Arthur Rock who once fired the CEO. He said,
“Steve Jobs was a national treasure, he is a visionary — so
bright — but I had to fire him from Apple.” 2
A board member needs to be prepared to face some rough
times — either when companies enter the hyper-growth mode
or when they fall apart. When Cisco’s venture-backed board
brought in a new CEO, his first job was to ensure there was no
blood in the hallways. “The quarter that I arrived, we hired a
shrink. He eliminated fighting in the open hallways. Physical
fighting, I mean. I actually had the vice president of engineer-
ing deck the sales vice president in my office!”3
Venture-backed 	boards 	undergo 	considerable 	stresses
when a portfolio company faces:

-- 421 of 546 --

392 	Challenges in the Boardroom
• 	CEO transitions
• 	Performance challenges
• 	Slower sales growth/Loss of key accounts
• 	Loss of key executives or churn of talent
• 	CEO transitions
• 	Market-based/external challenges
• 	Slower adoption and constrained market conditions
affecting sales or future financing
• 	Competitive forces disrupting the compa-
ny’s progress
• 	IP-related matters causing unforeseen issues
In challenging times, patterns of emotional behavior man-
ifest in ego games, actions taken to save face, self-interested
moves, and personal vendettas. Left unchecked, the force of
emotion may compromise directors’ abilities to promote the
shareholders’ best interests.
Ceo transitions
Professor Noam Wasserman writes in his book, The Founder’s
Dilemma,4 “Entrepreneurs face a choice, at every step, between
making money and managing their ventures. Those who don’t
figure out which is more important to them often end up nei-
ther wealthy nor powerful.” Several CEO behavioral charac-
teristics act as warning signs leading to a potential transition.
Pascal Levensohn points out that the CEO:
• 	Repudiates board input and stays the wrong course.
• 	Is often missing in action.
• 	Is defensive and combative with the board, stonewalling
board inquiries.
• 	Is not proactive in keeping the board informed.
• 	Shirks responsibilities or passes the blame.

-- 422 of 546 --

Ceo transitions 	393
If ignored, these warning signs can deteriorate into more
serious mismanagement problems such as revenue shortfalls,
gaps, and delays in meeting purchase targets or in complet-
ing contracts, and an exodus of employees. Valuation is often
impacted negatively when the CEOs do not relinquish control,
as seen in Exhibit 32.1.
Almost two-thirds of all venture-backed startup compa-
nies replace their founding CEOs or top executives, as seen in
Exhibit 32.2. Initiating and managing transitions during the
changing of the guard is one of the most important decisions
venture capitalists will make as board directors or members.
Friction between the venture capitalist board members and
CEO generally arises during these times. As CEOs build man-
agement teams by recruiting trusted team members, the risk of
implosion during such times can be high. With their broader
perspectives, venture capitalist board members can lobby
to add talent outside the CEO’s circle. This kind of strategic
recruiting may call for the difficult task of moving founding
Exhibit 32.1 Impact on Valuation When CEOs Gave Up Both Board
Control and CEO Role.
Share of Company
Valuation ($m)
Share of Company
Valuation ($m)
Gave up both CEO role and
board control
6.5 	9.5
CEO role only 	5 	7.2
Board control only 	4.1 	6.1
Kept both CEO role and board control 	3.3 	4.8
Source: Based on Founder’s Dilemma, 2012, Noam Wasserman, Sample size of ~200 companies © 2012 Princeton University Press
Exhibit 32.2 CEO Changes over Series of Investments.
A Round 	B Round 	C Round 	D Round
Founder still CEO 	75% 	62% 	48% 	39%
On 2nd CEO 	19% 	29% 	35% 	38%
On 3rd or more CEO 	6% 	9% 	17% 	23%
Source: Based on Founder’s Dilemma, 2012, Noam Wasserman, Sample size of ~200 companies © 2012 Princeton University Press

-- 423 of 546 --

394 	Challenges in the Boardroom
members out of management seats and into more supportive,
advisory roles.
Such transitions can be challenging for both sides — in the
formative stages, the VCs mentor the CEO, act as sounding boards,
and even joke that they act as corporate shrinks. This build-up
leads to deepening personal ties, but a practitioner needs to real-
ize the consequences of any friendship. “One of the mistakes I
made early on was trying to become friends with the entrepre-
neurs. You eventually learn that you can like them and admire
them, . . . and you get too close to them, and it sort of inhibits you
in some ways,” James Swartz of Accel Partners once stated.5
Exhibit 32.2 shows how founders change over rounds. The
best way to manage these changes is to anticipate them, moni-
tor for early signs of leadership problems, and act quickly and
decisively before any shortfalls lead to irreparable damage.
One way to do this is for both parties to establish specific per-
formance expectations. Annual reviews of CEO performance,
including management team feedback, board member feed-
back, and input from other key stakeholders, are critical.
Besides value creation, the role of the board member is crit-
ical in assessing the performance of the CEO and helping iden-
tify and recruit other suitable members of the management
team. Studies have shown that in venture-backed companies,
management turmoil and change are constant, and roughly
half of the CEOs step away. it is rare that founders are able to
retain their roles as CEOs during the rapid evolution stages of
the company — managing people, budgets, and technology in
a rapidly evolving marketplace is difficult. Thus, a practitioner
needs to be prepared to identify and recruit key management
talent. John Doerr of Kleiner Perkins identifies himself as the
“glorious recruiter.” Benchmark Capital went on to bring a top
recruiter as a full partner in the firm. Leonard Bosack, along
with his wife, Sandy Lerner, formed Cisco Systems. Their ten-
ure with Cisco lasted for four years after they raised their first
$2.5 million Series A round from Sequoia Capital.6
“It’s a tough decision and very disruptive,” says Deepak
Kamra of Canaan Partners. He adds, “It’s much easier to assume
that the CEO will eventually work out, so let’s keep him.”

-- 424 of 546 --

Best PraCtiCes in managing Ceo transitions 	395
A Sand Hill Road investor pointed out that one of his port-
folio companies had a very effective CEO who was able to
build a world-class product. “The product risk was overcome
and the team surpassed our expectations — the CEO was a
great engineer who could get a product to market. After the
IPO, we agreed that the founder would be better suited in the
capacity of the chairman. Solidifying the company’s position
post-IPO required a different skill set.” Organizational devel-
opment and management, sustained growth, defending com-
petitive jabs — all under the public glare of analysts — calls for
a different timbre.
People seldom grow from managing product development,
to managing people, to eventually managing expectations in
post-IPO public glare. As human beings, we rarely recognize
our own shortcomings and inabilities when it comes to manag-
ing people, products, and capital.
As John Kenneth Galbraith once remarked, “The great
entrepreneur must, in fact, be compared in life with the male
‘epis mellifera.’ He accomplishes his act of conception at the
price of his own extinction.”7
Best PraCtiCes in managing Ceo transitions
While every investment starts with the assumption that the
team will perform, a practitioner can manage transitions effec-
tively by taking these action:
• 	Prioritize skills and experience essential to build the
company.
• 	Enlist support from the board as well as the existing CEO.
• 	Establish a new role for the founder ahead of time. If
the CEO initiates the change as seen in Exhibit 32.3, the
CEO can stay in other executive roles and can continue
to add value.
• 	Make the search priority one. One board member should
lead the process.

-- 425 of 546 --

396 	Challenges in the Boardroom
• 	Choose the closer: Prime candidates usually need per-
suasion. One board member — the best closer — works
with the dream candidate to close.
• 	Ensure that the founder and the new CEO are aligned
and an effective “hand-off” process is established.
• 	Stay close to the new CEO: To ensure a smooth transi-
tion, maintain a high-touch relationship in the first few
months. Avoid complacency after the CEO arrives.
CEO ousters can occur by board, or by the CEO them-
selves — each of which can impact the value of the company,
as seen in Exhibit 32.2. As one investor pointed out, “By far,
this is the biggest service any venture practitioner can do for
the CEO is to educate and alert the CEO, preferably prior to
making the investment, that transition is normal.”8
In a survey of over 300 participants, the National Association
of Corporate Directors (NACD) Private Company Governance
Survey concluded that the three weakest areas of board effectiveness
are director education, board evaluation, and CEO succession planning.
Often, venture-backed boards have little or no time to indulge in
the luxury of education, development, and self-evaluation.
PerFormanCe Challenges
Multiple classes of shares with multiple preferences stacked
on each other create a labyrinth wherein keeping track of each
entity’s agenda and economic interests can be challenging.
Exhibit 32.3 Triggers of Change and CEO Transition.
Moved to CTO
or CSO
Other C-Level
Role
Left the Company
Immediately
Lower-Level
Executive Role
Trigger of
change Board
26% 	25% 	37% 	13%
Trigger of change
Founder CEO
24% 	49% 	24% 	2%
Source: Based on Founder’s Dilemma, 2012, Noam Wasserman, Sample size of ~200 companies © 2012 Princeton University Press

-- 426 of 546 --

PerFormanCe Challenges 	397
Furthermore, while the terms may be static, each practitioner
and his or her fund’s status is dynamic.
Any venture capital fund owns preferred stock, while the
management may own common stock. Thus, any exit discus-
sions where the management or common shareholders do not
benefit would lead to frustration. In a few cases, the common
shareholders have successfully negotiated additional cash
prior to consenting to the sale of the company. According to one
entrepreneur, the carveout was offered only because the ven-
ture capitalists (VCs) were concerned about a possible share-
holder lawsuit challenging the terms of the sale. In another case
where the VCs lacked board control, the VCs offered a carveout
to obtain the support of the other directors for the sale.9
Cash Flow–related matters
If the burn rate is too high, management is seen as the primary
culprit. The board and the CEO may disagree on the spend rate
and priorities. Tension can arise over the priority of cash distri-
bution at exit when the numbers are mediocre — for example,
should accrued dividends, which primarily benefit investors,
have a priority over management performance bonuses?
Follow-on Funding Challenges
Are you writing checks to defend sunk capital? Or to fuel
growth? Consider the example of NEON, a health care IT com-
pany backed by ARCH Venture Partners. The company had
developed tools for hospitals to organize data and increase
transaction speed. The target market never developed because
the hospitals’ IT protocol had not reached the point at which
they could maximize the potential of NEON’s technology. And
any IT company selling to hospitals is leery about the sales
cycle, which can be as long as nine months or more. NEON
was one of the larger investments for ARCH, and thus, the
partners were investing a fair amount of time in trying to res-
urrect the opportunity. This conundrum has been faced by
many practitioners when the initial thesis of an opportunity

-- 427 of 546 --

398 	Challenges in the Boardroom
does not pan out. “The technology had to have a market some-
where . . . we just hadn’t found it yet,” Steven Lazarus, founder
of ARCH, would recall. From hospitals, where the adoption
for new technologies was sluggish, the company shifted its
target market to Wall Street. Its technology was ideally suited
for speedier transactions and messaging, and in five years
the company grew to $180 million in revenues before it was
acquired.10 ARCH continued to support the company despite
market-related challenges, and it paid off.
Compare NEON with the defunct online grocer Web-
van — termed as one of the most epic failures in the dot-com
bubble fiasco, this company sold groceries such as bread and
vegetables. Within 18 months it had spent $1 billion on several
futuristic warehouses, promising to offer groceries in 30 min-
utes or less. Webvan’s investor list was the who’s who of ven-
ture capital — Sequoia Capital, Benchmark Capital and several
others. The company raised almost half a billion dollars from
the public markets. However, the senior executives did not
have any experience in the supermarket trade — Webvan
went from being a $1.2 billion company with 4,500 employees
to being liquidated in under two years. “The presumption that
you needed to get big fast worked for Amazon.com and virtu-
ally no one else,” commented Gartner analyst Whit Andrews
at the time of Webvan’s bankruptcy.11
In each of these examples, the underlying challenges of
performance exist. Neither NEON nor Webvan was able to
penetrate the market. However, the market conditions — the
dot-com boom and bust — and capital needs of each business
(Webvan needed a lot of money, NEON did not) impact inves-
tor outcomes. Whatever be the reasons, the Webvan boardroom
may have been much more challenging as compared to NEON.
alignment on eXit
Successful venture capitalist board members have alignment
on timing, and value for a potential exit. If a company fails

-- 428 of 546 --

alignment on eXit 	399
to accomplish milestones, encounters dwindling resources,
or suffers from competitive pressures, the exit path and value
may be severely compromised. On the other hand, with strong
performance, selling to a corporate buyer or going public on
the stock exchange at the right time is expected to yield a
strong outcome.
But timing matters on exits, as does alignment of the
stakeholders. If one venture investor is under more pressure
to achieve an exit quickly than are other investors, the mis-
alignment can impair the exit value. Further, if the CEO or the
management team does not want to exit, the investors end up
with another set of challenges. As the company evolves into
maturation, it is rare and even unlikely that one individual
will encompass all the skills necessary to guide the CEO and
enhance value at every stage. Board members’ ability to add
value may diminish, and they need to cede their positions to
more suitable peers within the firm. This rarely happens in
practice — board members embed themselves within the com-
pany, especially as the company ascends to rapid growth. It’s
only during a crisis that disemboweling occurs.
At the heart of the challenge is the hero-worship rock star
culture — CEOs who perform well when it comes to valua-
tions and growth but are unable to maintain ethical and cul-
tural boundaries. Boards have been challenged in a number
of situations when fraud, misrepresentation, and harassment
have occurred, often led by the CEOs themselves.
Venture capitalists, most of whom are trying to be support-
ive and nurturing without being overbearing, can be silent
when a high-performing CEO delivers growth and stellar
valuations.
Often, the executives can collude, cook books, and defraud
investors. While rare, GCA Savvian’s Steve Fletcher warns,
“The CEO and CFO are the most important executives of a com-
pany. In reality, most of your information comes from them. If
a company’s executives really set out to defraud people, if they
make up invoices or clients, it’s difficult to detect as an auditor
or a board member or an investment banker.”12

-- 429 of 546 --

400 	Challenges in the Boardroom
Performance versus Governance: The Challenge of Rock
Star CEOs
Company 	Performance 	Challenges
Uber 	The world’s fastest-grow-
ing rideshare company,
raised ~$20 billion in 6
years and valued over
$80bn at IPO
Misled regulators, eva-
sion of law enforcement,
shortchanged taxi drivers,
overcharged customers,
threatened journalists.
Hostile work environment
includes sexual harassment.
Zenefits 	Fastest-growing SaaS
company ever, providing
online insurance to small
businesses, raised ~$500
million and valued at
~$4.5 billion
Flouted insurance laws,
skirted training require-
ments to sell insur-
ance products.
Reports of partying,
alcohol consumption in
the office.
Theranos 	Charismatic 19-year-old
Stanford dropout CEO,
promises to offer superior
blood tests. Raised $700
million and valued at
~$10 billion.
Lab-on-a-chip technology
did not perform, endan-
gered patient safety with
misleading and fraudu-
lent data. CEO indicted
with multiple counts for
defrauding investors, doc-
tors, and patients.
Outcome
Health
Installed flat-screen TVs in
doctors’ offices and patient
waiting rooms, streaming
pharma advertisements.
Raised ~$500 million and
valued at $5.5 billion.
Accusations of overcharg-
ing customers, falsify-
ing documents showing
inflated ad performance.
SoFi 	Financial products such as
student loans and mort-
gages. Raised $2.5 billion
in debt and equity and
valued ~$5 billion.
CEO resigns after allega-
tions of sexual harassment,
Federal Trade Commission
charges company with false
claims misrepresentation.
WeWork 	Co-working space;
expanded globally man-
aging 40 million sq. ft.
Raised $8 billion and was
valued over ~$40 bil-
lion at its peak.
CEO controls the board,
and received $300 million
loan from company to
exercise his stock options,
complex corporate struc-
ture, self-dealings.

-- 430 of 546 --

alignment on eXit 	401
To any practitioner, such case studies offer expensive
lessons:
• 	Cover the blind spots. Blind spots in business often occur
both when things are going badly and when the business
is going well. Assistant US Attorney Carl Blackstone,
who prosecuted the case against Johnston and Jones,
called Entellium a “legitimate company with a real prod-
uct and real employees” with the only discordance being
the inflated revenues, from which Johnston pocketed
about $1.4 million.14 In other words, there weren’t explicit
red flags to board members about something fishy in the
books. The numbers — even the exaggerated versions
Fraud
From: Paul Johnston
To: Pete Solvik; Jonathan D. Roberts
Subject: Resignation
Jonathan and Pete:
This is a very difficult e-mail to write, but effective immediately
both Parrish and I are tendering our resignation. We have both
made a grave mistake by misrepresenting our revenue reporting to
the board. Looking back at the time, we thought we would be able
to right the wrong and correct our representation, but we have not
been able to do this. Revenues have been overstated with a delta of
approximately $400K a month. . . .
So begins the sordid nightmare for a group of venture
capitalists that had invested $50 million in this company.
Entellium, the Seattle-based company that was driving the
next revolution of customer relationship management tools,
came under intense fire. Entellium’s four-year rise that gar-
nered it numerous product design awards, accolades from
BusinessWeek magazine and Forrester Research, and a CRM
Market Leader designation, ended with the arrest of CEO
Paul Johnston and CFO Parrish Jones.13

-- 431 of 546 --

402 	Challenges in the Boardroom
hammed up by Johnston and Jones — made sense and fit
the story of a robust company and its vibrant industry. As
a venture capitalist, it may be hard to question your char-
ismatic and driven founder and CEO, especially when
the numbers look great! Venture capitalists can avoid
being hoodwinked by learning to intelligently question
all the facts. Safeguards like periodic in-depth reviews of
sales to dig deeper into financial records can help.
• 	Put healthy skepticism to work by putting periodic reviews
in place. A study found that among 1,770 VCs who have
taken at least one of their portfolio firms public, 196
(11.07 percent) of them have funded a fraudulent IPO
firm, and 154 (8.7 percent) of them have backed an IPO
firm that committed fraud after their exit.15 Obviously,
the VCs who backed Entellium are not alone.
• 	Enlist key players and enhance information flow. A strong
relationship with the business development team might
have exposed deception sooner since collusion was
largely confined to the CEO and CFO. Gathering inputs
from people who aren’t on the management team nor
have any interest in sticking to the management team’s
story can be valuable.
• 	Financial audits. Despite the high costs of financial audits,
this is an important step to ensure checks and balances.
Board eValUation
Self-evaluation of boards, while it seldom occurs, is a critical
exercise. Venture-backed company boards tend to be smaller
in size and are more interactive. Thus, the formal self-eval-
uation may never occur. Nevertheless, several CEOs of ven-
ture-backed companies express the challenges of time and
attention. In a McKinsey study of 586 corporate directors,
respondents pointed out that they would like to double their
time on strategy and spend at least five times their time on tal-
ent management.16

-- 432 of 546 --

Board eValUation 	403
Quotes such as, “He learned how to be a director. We paid
the tuition,” or “My strategy is to minimize the value sub-
tracted” 17 are indicative of fundamental challenges that exist
in the boardroom. In the white paper “A Simple Guide to Basic
Responsibilities of a VC-Backed Director,” 18 guidelines for an
annual self-review suggest the following criteria:
• 	Preparedness
• 	Review all board materials prior to meetings.
• 	Be aware of key challenges for the company, both
short term and long term.
• 	Communicate with other board members
between meetings.
• 	Complete any assignments in a timely and thor-
ough fashion.
• 	Alignment
• 	Align with other board members and CEO
with respect to key performance indicators and
challenges.
• 	Ensure other board members are aligned with CEO
and supportive, as well.
• 	Raise any challenging issues related to performance
and conflicts, which are not to be ignored or brushed
under the carpet.
• 	Attention
• 	Attend all board meetings, engaged in thoughtful
manner without cell phone or email distractions.
• 	Contribution
• 	Proactively seek ways of assisting the CEO to meet
or exceed their goals. The CEO is at the center of the
board’s universe and a VC’s role is to be supportive,
staying behind the scenes as much as possible.
When time is the most critical resource, especially in early-
stage companies, no director is going to raise his or her hand to

-- 433 of 546 --

404 	Challenges in the Boardroom
take on any additional tasks. Board self-evaluation remains an
academic exercise at best. After all, who will bell the proverbial
cat? No CEO is going to push their board, even though they
are the beneficiaries of a well-functioning board. Lead direc-
tors seem reluctant to create more work. In conversations with
several board members, such a practice has yet to be suggested,
leave alone being adopted with enthusiasm. Lindsay Aspe-
gren of North Coast Technology Investors summarizes the
challenges of a board member succinctly, “As board members,
we are charged to make decisions amidst a dynamic and fast-
changing microcosm. We have to manage change effectively.
It is not only understanding this role but having the skills and
the experience to do this job well. There is much emphasis on
the front-end, the deal, in our business, but not enough on the
post-investment plan.”

-- 434 of 546 --

Part Five
405
“I remember one morning,” writes Nikos Kazantzakis in Zorba
the Greek, “when I discovered a cocoon in the back of a tree just
as a butterfly was making a hole in its case and preparing to
come out. I waited awhile, but it was too long appearing, and
I was impatient. I bent over it and breathed on it to warm it.
I warmed it as quickly as I could and the miracle began to happen
before my eyes, faster than life. The case opened; the butterfly
started slowly crawling out, and I shall never forget my horror
when I saw how its wings were folded back and crumpled;
the wretched butterfly tried with its whole trembling body to
unfold them. Bending over it, I tried to help it with my breath,
in vain. It needed to be hatched out patiently and the unfold-
ing of the wings should be a gradual process in the sun. Now
it was too late. My breath had forced the butterfly to appear all
crumpled, before its time. It struggled desperately and, a few
seconds later, died in the palm of my hand. That little body is,
I do believe, the greatest weight I have on my conscience. For
I realize today that it is a mortal sin to violate the great laws of
nature. We should not hurry, we should not be impatient, but
we should confidently obey the external rhythm.”
Exits: Liquidity Events
and Champagne

-- 435 of 546 --

406 	PART FIVE 	ExITs: LIquIdITy EVEnTs And ChAmPAgnE
Many startups have been killed while VCs, trying to do
good, breathe their strategy, scaling, and other proxy-opera-
tional techniques to ensure a good and a speedy exit. This does
not weigh on the capitalist conscience, though — we brush it
away as risk, even the price of doing business.
The best VCs know that companies are always bought,
never sold. In that vein, the singular goal is to not optimize
for a premature exit — it is to ensure that the company has
its fundamentals in place and is always playing from a posi-
tion of strength. Good companies will always have plenty of
options at every inflection point. But there may be only one
such company — for the other nine companies in your portfo-
lio, be prepared to earn your stripes. In this section, let us look
at the various pathways to exits.
The business of VC is about liquidity events, which is more
than drinking fine wine. You can declare success only when you
have completed the full cycle of an investment and returned
capital to your LPs, ideally more than what they gave you.

-- 436 of 546 --

33
407
“For I must tell you friendly in your ear, Sell when you can,
you are not for all markets,” writes William Shakespeare, in
As You Like It (Act 3 Scene V). The bard knew about the temp-
tations of a VC. When a portfolio company is acquired, or its
stock trades on the public exchanges, those rare (and hopefully
happy) moments are what we live for, celebrate, and, at times,
heave a sigh of relief. Capital invested comes back to LPs, com-
pletes a full circle, and an investor “exits the investment” by
selling the stock of the portfolio company.
EXIT OPTIONS
The two primary exit options, acquisitions and initial public
offerings (IPOs), are reviewed, along with private exchanges—
an emerging option with implications for some highly sought-
after technology companies. As seen in Exhibit 33.1, data from
VentureSource samples show that 13 percent of exits end up
in an IPO while 43 percent are acquisitions. A typical portfolio
sees losses well above 40 percent of its companies.
Exit Strategies
Exhibit 33.1 Frequency of portfolio outcomes.
IPO 	M&A 	Failure
13% 	43% 	44%
Data: VentureSource

-- 437 of 546 --

408 	EXIT STraTEgIES
• 	Mergers and acquisitions (M&A or trade-sale). Mergers
and acquisitions is the most popular path of exit for a
venture-backed company. Also called trade sale, a port-
folio company is sold to a larger company. The trans-
action nets a return for investors, who, in turn, share
the spoils with their limited partners. Many M&A
exits are disguised failures, where over 20 percent of
investments have lost money on a cash-on-cash basis
at another 19 percent have yielded outcomes between
1X and 2X. 1
• 	Initial public offering. A highly desired badge of honor;
investors list a company on a publicly traded stock
exchange and sell privately owned shares for the first
time to the public. Of course, fewer companies can
demonstrate the growth and value to be considered
IPO ready. And after they are ready, the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC), the federal regulatory
body, prescribes rules and regulations on public offer-
ings to keep everyone honest and protect that little old
lady. Some venture practitioners treat the public offering
as a financing event and not an exit. Compared to acqui-
sitions, IPOs typically deliver a higher return to inves-
tors, as seen in Exhibit 33.2.
• 	Secondary markets and private exchanges. Several options
for 	secondary 	markets 	such 	as 	private 	exchanges
have sprung up, offering shares of hot startups to eager
buyers.
Exhibit 33.2 Returns: Or why an IPO is better.
Exit Path 	Median IRR (%) 	Mean IRR (%) 	Standard Deviation
IPO 	58.39 % 	123.42 % 	207.97
M&A 	18.32 % 	75.32 % 	408.27
Source: CEPERS, Frankfurt. For exits between 1971 and 2003, with 100 to 400 observations. Data from Center for Private Equity
Research, Frankfurt. Carsten Bienz and Tore E. Leite, “A Pecking Order of Venture Capital Exits “(April 2008). Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=916742.

-- 438 of 546 --

EXIT OPTIONS 	409
• 	Redemption of shares. Remember that redemption clause
you negotiated — the one where you can treat your
equity much like a debt instrument and trigger the repay-
ment after five years! That is technically an exit, but no
venture practitioner worth his IRR speaks of redemption
in public.
And yes, a write-off is technically an exit in disguise, but it
doesn’t need much deliberation. Be assured that in your port-
folio, the lemons, as depicted in Exhibit 33.3, will always ripen
much faster. Stated differently, the losses occur much faster.
Each exit path has its own advantages and challenges, as
seen in Exhibit 33.4.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
More than 3 and
Less than 7 Years
Less than 3 Years 	More than 7 Years
Number of Companies
Losers 	Winners
Exhibit 33.3 Lemons ripen faster than pearls — or losses often come
before profits.
Source: Jeffry Timmons, New Venture Creation: Entrepreneurship for the 21st Century, 5th ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1999).

-- 439 of 546 --

410 	EXIT STraTEgIES
PrECONDITIONS FOr aN EXIT
Certain preconditions need to be established prior to any exit
overtures. These are discussed in Exhibit 33.5.
alignment of Interests of Stakeholders
Alignment of interests of various stakeholders can determine
whether passage of an exit will be smooth or be a joyride to the
suburbia of hell. The cast of characters includes:
• 	Board of directors, presumably with multiple investors,
each with varying degrees of motivations and investor
preferences
• 	Founders/chief executive officer motivations
• 	Common shareholders’ interests
Exhibit 33.4 Exit methods.
Method of Exit 	Pros 	Cons
Acquisition (trade-sale) Speed.
Reduced regulatory challenges
(assuming the FTC does not get
involved!).
Value can be lower in comparison to
an IPO, but, as many practitioners
point out, it is efficient.
Companies are always bought, never sold.
Earnouts may be beyond the full control of
current management or existing investors.
Founders or any other shareholders cannot
retain partial ownership.
Listing on public
exchange or an
IPO (initial public
offering)
Larger valuation in stronger market
conditions. Can use stock for
acquisitions. Improves stature
and morale. Founders can retain
partial ownership
Company needs to achieve substantial growth
rates.
Expensive and complex process.
Regulatory and market challenges.
Private exchanges 	Rapid liquidity. Higher valuations. 	Awareness and demand for the companies
must be high. No one is looking to invest
in no-name companies.
Value is determined by sheer frothiness and
public market-like speculation.
Redemption 	Ability to recover capital, assuming
company has cash at hand at the
time of redemption.
Dependent on company’s ability to redeem, as
well as other balance sheet obligations
and board composition. Payouts could be
spread out over time to minimize cash
impact, further reducing any IRR.

-- 440 of 546 --

PrECONDITIONS FOr aN EXIT 	411
Naturally, the board exerts the maximum influence, but
the role of other stakeholders is important as exits are being
planned. Consider a Cisco executive who, while conducting
due diligence, assesses the quality and character of the target
company’s management team. Cisco interacts with the execu-
tives in an informal manner to explore short-term and long-
term goals. “We look for culture, qualities, and leadership
style. We don’t care about the product that is on the manu-
facturing floor . . . the second- and third-generation product
is locked up in their heads,” a Cisco executive points out. 2
John Chambers, the CEO of Cisco, laid out five guidelines
for acquiring companies, including the “chemistry between
Exhibit 33.5 Preconditions for an exit.
Preconditions for
an Exit 	Favorable Conditions 	Unfavorable Conditions
Value drivers 	Rapid sales and expansion,
market leadership and
proprietary position.
Flat growth, limited potential. Sagging morale. A dog.
A distraction.
Board-investor
alignment
Board members/investors are
aligned with respect to
timing and value of exit.
The largest investor wants that quick hit — a fund-
raise cycle is coming up and we need that IRR!
You want to stay! Or the largest investor (and the
chairman of the board) is fatigued and wants to
get rid of this dog. You, on the other hand, are a
seed investor and control a fraction of the shares.
And the common shareholders want to block the
sale because those 3X liquidation preferences do
not leave any crumbs for them.
Board–
management
alignment
Board and CEO/founders are in
agreement with respect to
timing and value of exit.
The investors want to sell. The CEO wants to grow.
Investors sell — unhappy CEO ends up writing a
book. What a wicked world!
The CEO wants to sell — the investors want to hold
and build value. A premature liquidity event for
VCs!
Market demand 	Buyers are kicking the doors
down. A nice auction
process is driving price and
IRR to all-time highs. Sell
this — and get that PPM
ready for the next fund
raise?
No market demand, but we want to sell. Hire an
I-banker, prepare a book, and start the selling
process. With no bites and sinking cash position,
attempt to raise a bridge note or swallow a down
round. Eighteen months later, shut the company
down.
Macro conditions Strong public markets and
economic conditions.
Competition, erosion of margins, regulatory changes.

-- 441 of 546 --

412 	EXIT STraTEgIES
companies has to be right” and “long-term win for all four
constituencies — shareholders, employees, customers, and
business partners.” 3 If the founders and CEO of the target
company do not see the exit as a win, it may show during
buyer diligence. When Ted Dacko, CEO of HealthMedia, was
getting ready to complete the sale of his company to Johnson
& Johnson, he was not worried about the exit value as much
as the team culture. “I wanted to ensure everyone understood
the exit strategy and was aligned — we did not have any pas-
sive aggressive behavior,” he says.
Exit strategies, value, and timing evolve as the company
matures. Practitioners have a strong sense of when a company
has matured or is languishing toward failure. If a company fails
to accomplish future-financing rounds, misses milestones and
targets, exhausts ideas and resources, or sees its market shrink
or shift, then it is critical to close down operations rather than to
slowly wither into oblivion. 5 Conversely, selling to a corporate
buyer or going public at the right time is certainly expected as
a strong outcome. Timing matters. Premature efforts to drive
exits can lead to depressed value or, worse, no buyer interest.
Sell too late and the dynamics may shift — potential buyers,
Aligning the Board and the Management Team
We had a tough time convincing our board of directors who
were also our investors to embrace many of our activities
that would help build the Zappos brand and make the world
a better place. The directors didn’t fully understand or were
convinced of things like brand or culture, dismissing many
of these as “Tony’s social experiments.” Sequoia expected an
exit in five years and hadn’t signed up for these additional
things. I was pretty close to being fired from the board. I
was learning that alignment with shareholders and board of
directors was just as important.4

-- 442 of 546 --

PRECONDITIONS FOR AN EXIT 	413
market conditions, and the arrival of competition could impair
the value. Mitch Lasky of Benchmark Capital points out that
the window of exit opportunity can be narrow. “Look for that
S Curve when growth and exit multiples are on your side,” he
says. See Exhibit 33.6.
Alignment of Exit Value: What’s a Few Hundred
Million, Anyway?
At an appropriate time, specific exit values should also be dis-
cussed openly to ensure alignment with various stakeholders.
For example, different investors may have conflicting valuations
in mind. Examples abound where one venture capitalist was
happy to part with the company for $100 million and another
was expecting to turn at least $300 million.6 If the liquidation
preferences come into play and gravely impact the common
shareholders, unpleasant situations, such as holdup of the vot-
ing process or, worse, lawsuits, can ensue.
100
75
50
25
0
Market share %
Laggards
16%
Late
Majority
34%
Early
Majority
34%
Early
Adopters
13.5%
Innovators
2.5%
Exhibit 33.6 Diffusion of innovations — and the best exit window.

-- 443 of 546 --

414 	EXIT STraTEgIES
The Greatest Teacher, Failure Is
Roelof Botha, partner at Sequoia, says, “I’m wrong all the time; as
Yoda says in The Last Jedi, ‘The greatest teacher, failure is.’ When
I realize I’m wrong about an investment decision, for example, I
try to learn not only from the things I missed at the time, but also
from what I didn’t anticipate. What ended up happening that I failed to
imagine? Once you’ve made up your mind, it’s difficult to go back
and revisit those preconceived ideas. But that’s how you avoid the
same traps next time.”
Investor Peter Thiel does not believe it is productive to contem-
plate the reason for failure. “Most businesses fail for more than one
reason. You don’t learn anything because you will think it failed
for Reason 1, but it failed for Reasons 1 through Reason 5. The next
business will fail for Reason 2 and then for Reason 3 and so on. I
think people actually do not learn very much from failure. I think
it ends up being quite damaging and demoralizing to people in
the long run, and my sense is that the death of every business is a
tragedy. So I think failure is neither a Darwinian nor an educational
imperative,” he says.7
Marc Andreessen has a similar worldview. “Forward. We
don’t stop, slow down, or second guess. We don’t revisit past deci-
sions,” he says.
In hospitals and doctors’ residency training programs, a mor-
bidity and mortality (M&M) conference is held. Surgeons and
residents candidly discuss complications and deaths. Students are
often present, as this is a great learning opportunity. The resident
practitioner who performed the operation presents the summary
of the case, pertinent history, physical examination findings, lab
results, and images. Cases are presented and critiqued by the par-
ticipants. Questions are asked on why the case was managed in
a certain way. Other surgeons often chime in to share their views
and learning from similar cases. Often, a consensus may be reached
if the complication could have been prevented. Such honest and
robust conversations often prevent the same mistakes from occur-
ring and can save lives in the future. The atmosphere can be rich
with debates, but the goal is not to blame any one person nor elicit
retribution. Every attendee learns from the mistakes. The focus of
such a conference is on education, improving quality of care, and
saving lives.
When it comes to analyzing the cause of startup failures, can a
venture capitalist learn from this model?

-- 444 of 546 --

PrECONDITIONS FOr aN EXIT 	415
For any practitioner (and any LP), the exit of an investment
is a much-anticipated event. But savvy practitioners do not
necessarily aim for premature exits—rather, they work toward
building stable and sound companies that generate value for
customers. For such companies, exit options are always plenti-
ful and never at the mercy of markets.

-- 445 of 546 --



-- 446 of 546 --

34
417
THE PRIMARY PATH TO AN EXIT
Acquisitions are seen as the fastest way for larger companies
to expand, whether vertically or horizontally. Such growth by
acquisition strategies can bolster companies’ revenues, profita-
bility, and entry in new markets, or often fend off competition.
VC-backed companies make strong acquisition candidates,
as they often offer an established revenue/customer base
and proprietary technology, are profitable and receptive to
fair valuation metrics, have a unique and defensible market
position, and employ strong management teams. For larger
companies, especially the ones with significant cash, stagnant
revenues, and limited growth potential, acquisitions is a core
component of their growth strategy. Exhibit 34.1 lists motiva-
tions for buyers (acquirers), as well as sellers.
Acquisitions
Exhibit 34.1 Exit drivers.
Acquirers’ Motivations 	Sellers’ Motivations
Growth and increased revenues via access to new
products, geographic markets
Operational synergies and reduced risks via
diversification
Accelerating innovation, minimizing research, and
development risks
Access to talent (or acqui-hires)
Industry consolidation
Defensive / Competition
Positive market/macroeconomic conditions
Financial trade-offs: time and capital required to create
future value versus present value
Investor liquidity
Inability to raise capital to fuel additional organic growth
Reduced pace of growth
Ability to sustain competitive pressures
Margin erosion
Regulatory challenges
Intellectual property landscape

-- 447 of 546 --

418 	AcquIsITIONs
When larger companies, often bereft of research budgets,
seek rapid growth, new product lines, or technologies, the first
choice may be to try and build innovative products in-house.
Any chief technology officer (CTO) of a technology company
will strongly assert that their team can develop new products
internally, and do it faster and cheaper. However, except for a
handful of nimble companies, there are not many examples of
successful innovation in larger organizations. The innovator’s
dilemma plays out often, where the giants cannot dance. The
potential for increased revenues, competitive dynamics, and
financial growth and market timing comes into play. Often,
this is where the CFO and the corporate development team
display their acumen and go on a shopping spree.
Whatever the motivation — technological, market driven,
or ego driven — target companies and venture practitioners
benefit from such behavior. The search process starts where
the acquirer establishes certain criteria to narrow down the
universe of potential targets. At a very primal level, every CEO
seeks to deploy excess cash to build a larger empire via acquisi-
tions and demonstrate King Arthur–like prowess. Warren Buf-
fett remarked, “Of one thing be certain: if a CEO is enthused
about a particularly foolish acquisition, both his internal staff
and his outside advisors will come up with whatever projec-
tions are needed to justify his stance. Only in fairy tales are
emperors told that they are naked.”
When any acquisition-related discussions occur, practi-
tioners point to their duty to shareholders of maximizing the
outcome for all. Thus, in certain situations, bringing in an
investment banker would be appropriate. For the investment
banker, the goal of such an exercise is to drive the price up, or
run an auction. Daniel Axelsen, formerly with investment bank
Qatalyst Partners, says, “The company and the board have
a fiduciary obligation to all shareholders to maximize value.
These processes are like a three-dimensional game of chess,”
Daniel says. In one transaction, Qatalyst drove the sale price
from $1.15 billion to $2.4 billion, all in a matter of a few weeks.
If Google wants to buy a company, surely some competi-
tors would love to jump into the fray. When Google did a

-- 448 of 546 --

THE PRIMARY PATH TO AN EXIT 	419
$900 million deal with MySpace, Microsoft followed soon
thereafter and did a $300 million deal with Facebook. This
move turned out to be a much better win for Microsoft. Invest-
ment bankers can often drive competing entities to bid, and
can drum up additional interest from various acquirers and
juggle with different interested buyers, all the time pushing
the price as high as possible. The frenzy often culminates with
a letter of intent (LOI) with one of the suitors. At times, the
buyer promptly locks up the game by proposing a “no shop”
clause, where the target cannot indulge in the shopping exer-
cise. Axelsen says, “Exclusive processes are a lot harder and
don’t necessarily yield the best results.”
A buyer’s due diligence process will occur in phases. The
primary goal of the buyer is to ensure that the technology and
teams are a suitable fit within its existing fabric. Thus, while
the product lines, revenues, and markets are tangible, the softer
challenges of postmerger integration are important as well. For
example, Cisco sets short-term and long-term joint initiatives
with the target’s management team as a way to assess culture,
management qualities, and leadership styles. It looks for softer
cues and watches if one person speaks over everyone else. Do
some people roll their eyes when the other is talking? Cisco
negotiates directly with key individuals to identify their post-
acquisition intentions and also insists on employees waiving
their accelerated vesting rights to ensure that they stay with
the company post-integration.
Valuation is not the most important negotiating point. 1 One
Cisco executive remarked, “Acquisitions are not financial — we
do not do them because we can swing a good deal — they are strategic
and help grow our company in the right direction.”2 When a buyer
seeks to make a strategic acquisition, the price is no longer a
multiple, but could be significantly higher.
“As a practitioner, your goal is to understand that universe
of strategic buyers,” says Lindsay Aspegren of North Coast
Technology Investors. For larger companies, effective integra-
tion is key, or else the entire exercise is deemed a failure. Cisco
has a small army of employees to manage the post-integra-
tion process. An integration leader is appointed, and within

-- 449 of 546 --

420 	AcquIsITIONs
30 days of announcement, the human resources team lays out
compensation plans for the team so that the talent pool can
avoid uncertainty, stays, and focuses on creating value.
After the board approval and shareholder consents, the
closing process begins.
A Big Fish Swallows a Small Fish
Acquisitions are seldom completed in five easy steps as described,
followed by hugs and a friendly dinner. Often, people threaten, lose
sleep and fret, wave their arms. It’s a storm of greed, fear, and the
desire to win. The stakes are high.
When Quidisi, a company that operated Diapers.com, reached
$300 million in sales in a few years, Amazon took notice. Over an
introductory lunch, an Amazon executive ominously informed the
founders of Quidisi that the giant was getting ready to start selling
diapers. They should consider selling to Amazon.
Quidisi had raised over $50 million from leading venture
capitalists in Silicon Valley. The founders didn’t jump in, and a
few months later they noticed something strange — Amazon
had dropped prices on diapers by as much as 30%. As an experi-
ment, Quidisi changed prices, and voilà — Amazon’s tracking bots
monitored and changed its prices, too. For Quidisi, this price drop
impacted growth and started to erode profit margins. Worse, its
ability to raise additional equity capital or possibly consider an IPO
was now slimmer than ever.
In the meantime, Walmart made an acquisition overture to
Quidisi, and offered $450 million. Quidisi founders flew to Seattle
to meet with Bezos to discuss Amazon’s interest. To keep the heat,
that morning, Amazon announced a service called Amazon Mom,
where it offered a 30% discount and free shipping. When Quidisi
factored these maneuvers in the costs of selling diapers, Amazon
was on track to lose $100 million in three months on diapers alone.
Amazon was doing about $34 billion in revenues, and Bezos
wanted Diapers.com at a price. He was also not going to let this
slip to Walmart, which did over $400 billion in revenues. Amazon’s
$540 million offer was open for 48 hours, and even as the offer was
tentatively accepted, Walmart countered with $600 million. Execu-
tives at Amazon let Quidisi know that Bezos was such a furious
competitor, that he would trigger a “thermo-nuclear” option and
drive diaper prices to zero if they sold to Walmart. A lot of Amazon
Moms would have been happier at free diapers. The move paid off
and Quidisi was sold to Amazon, largely out of fear.3

-- 450 of 546 --

The Primary PaTh To an exiT 	421
As seen in Exhibit 34.2, acquisitions are significantly larger
as compared to public offerings.
Acquisitions are the preferred path for most venture-
backed companies due to speed and efficiency, as well as mini-
mal regulatory challenges. Acquisitions offer larger companies
much-needed growth and expansion opportunities. Consider
Exhibits 34.3 and 34.4.
Most technology companies grow via acquisitions, and
slower innovators like Amazon, Google, Facebook, and Apple
have acquired 445 companies in 2007–2019. IBM acquired
over 70 companies in seven years, spending about $14 billion.4
By pushing these newly acquired products through an exist-
ing global sales force, IBM estimates it increased its revenue
by almost 50 percent in the first two years after each acqui-
sition and an average of more than 10 percent over the next
three years. 5
473 	475
663
813 953 845 	779
60
12
41
62
125
43 85
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
2006 	2008 	2010 	2012 	2014 	2016 	2018
Acquisitions versus IPOs
Acquisitions 	All IPOs 	VC Backed IPOs
Exhibit 34.2 Liquidity events of VC-backed companies.
Source: Modified from NVCA 2019 Yearbook, Data provided by Pitchbook.

-- 451 of 546 --

422 	acquisiTions
91.6 	87.5
118.4
134.9
240.4 	246.9
293.7
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2006 	2008 	2010 	2012 	2014 	2016 	2018
M&A Exit Values - Mean ($m)
Exhibit 34.3 Acquisitions — Mean deal values.
4.7 	4.9 	5 	5.06 5.31
5.73
6.34
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2006 	2008 	2010 	2012 	2014 	2016 	2018
Average Time to Exit in Years
(From 1st VC to Exit)
Exhibit 34.4 Average time to exit in years.
Source: Modified from NVCA 2019 Yearbook, Data provided by Pitchbook.
Source: Modified from NVCA 2019 Yearbook, Data provided by Pitchbook.

-- 452 of 546 --

THE PRIMARY PATH TO AN EXIT 	423
By rough estimates, Cisco acquired over 120 companies
over a 15-year span — roughly an average of 8–12 companies
each year. The first 71 companies acquired within an eight-
year period 6 were at an average price of approximately $350
million. In that same period, Cisco’s sales increased from $650
million to $22 billion, with nearly 40 percent revenue coming
directly from these acquisitions.7
Google acquired 131 companies over a 12-year period, 8 an
average of 10 companies a year. For Google, the technology
drivers have opened up new revenue sources. Its acquisition of
Applied Semantics helped Google develop a text-advertising
network called AdSense, now a multibillion-dollar revenue
generator. Andy Rubin’s startup, Android Inc., was snapped
up by Google and led to the development of Android, a lead-
ing operating system for smartphones.9
Key drivers for acquisitions are:
• 	Improved revenues and profitability.
• 	Operational synergies. Larger companies seek to reduce
costs and expand revenues and profitability by seeking
synergistic companies that feed their value chain.
• 	Vertical. Vertical synergies occur when an acquirer
moves vertically — up or down the value chain or
supply chain. Also called forward integration or
backward integration.
• 	Horizontal. Horizontal synergies occur when an
acquirer moves to buy another company within an
adjacent domain.
• 	Diversification of product lines to increase revenues.
• 	Geographic penetration. Access to a new geographic
territory, when conducted internationally, is also
referred to as cross-border transactions.
• 	Quash any rising threats: Apple bought Lala, a cloud-
based web streaming music service, and within a
few months shut it down. Lala users are angry; yet
Apple bought Lala simply to take it offline because it

-- 453 of 546 --

424 	AcquIsITIONs
Three Hidden Motivators of Acquisitions
The real reasons companies are acquired
Warren Buffett describes the three primary drivers of
acquisitions — animal spirits (Don’t just stand there, do
something. Buy a company), bigger is better (Ego. Larger
acquisitions are better), and undue optimism on post-
merger integration (It will all work out — if not, all we lose
is shareholder capital). He writes, “We suspect three motiva-
tions — usually unspoken — to be, singly or in combination,
at work in high-premium takeovers.”
This is Buffett’s take:
Leaders, business or otherwise, seldom are deficient
in animal spirits and often relish increased activity and
challenge.
All the other kids have one, what about me?
When a CEO is encouraged by his advisors to make deals,
he responds much as would a teenage boy who is encour-
aged by his father to have a normal sex life. It’s not a push
he needs. Some years back, a CEO friend of mine — in jest,
it must be said — unintentionally described the pathology
of many big deals. This friend, who ran a property-casualty
insurer, was explaining to his directors why he wanted to
acquire a certain life insurance company. After droning
rather unpersuasively through the economics and strate-
gic rationale for the acquisition, he abruptly abandoned the
script. With an impish look, he simply said: “Aw, fellas, all
the other kids have one.”
I am bigger. . . .
Most organizations, business or otherwise, measure
themselves, are measured by others, and compensate their
managers far more by the yardstick of size than by any other
yardstick. (Ask a Fortune 500 manager where his corporation
stands on that famous list and, invariably, the number will be

-- 454 of 546 --

THE PRIMARY PATH TO AN EXIT 	425
didn’t like the price erosion — Lala was charging 10
cents per track as compared to 99 cents on the iTunes
music store. 11 Google snapped up reMail, a popular
iPhone application that provides “lightning fast”
full-text search. reMail was yanked from the iTunes
App Store soon thereafter and no predictions were
made on the future of reMail. As TechCrunch’s MG
Siegler predicted, “Google is just as happy to kill one
of the best email applications on the iPhone — much
better than the iPhone’s native email app.”
ranked by size of sales; he may well not even know where his
corporation places on the list by profitability.)
Kissing toads, optimistically. . . .
Many managers apparently were overexposed in impres-
sionable childhood years to the story in which the impris-
oned handsome prince is released from a toad’s body by a
kiss from a beautiful princess. Consequently, they are certain
their managerial kiss will do wonders for the profitability of
Company T(arget). Such optimism is essential. Absent that
rosy view, why else should the shareholders of Company
A(cquisitor) want to own an interest in T at the 2X takeover
cost rather than at the x market price they would pay if they
made direct purchases on their own? In other words, inves-
tors can always buy toads at the going price for toads. If
investors instead bankroll princesses who wish to pay dou-
ble for the right to kiss the toad, those kisses had better pack
some real dynamite. We’ve observed many kisses but very
few miracles. Nevertheless, many managerial princesses
remain serenely confident about the future potency of their
kisses — even after their corporate backyards are knee-deep
in unresponsive toads.10

-- 455 of 546 --

426 	Acquisitions
If acquisitions offer an efficient mechanism for generating
returns, who are GPs to judge these human fallacies of ego,
mindless activity, and undue optimism? As cash piles are
hoarded by public companies, the animal spirits for acquisi-
tions will continue. Rich Levandov, an investor in several tech-
nology start-ups says, “Venture capital is about asymmetrical
information and value — you know something that the buyer
does not and you have something that a buyer wants — and
wants it now,” he says. One of his portfolio companies was
a startup with no revenues. Yet five buyers jostled over each
other to snag the company. For one of his companies that got
an unsolicited soft overture, First Mark Capital’s Rick Heitz-
mann politely demurred, “We do not wish to sell, but if you are
aggressive about buying, let’s see your offer.”
PuttinG tHE coMPAnY uP FoR sALE
Should the board decide to put the company for sale, the pro-
cess, as seen in Exhibit 34.5, starts with testing the market con-
ditions — or dipping your toe in the water.
Test the
market
Hire an Inv.
Banker
Diligence &
Intent Negotiations 	Approvals
and Closing
Exhibit 34.5 Typical trade sale process.

-- 456 of 546 --

PuTTING THE cOMPANY uP FOR sALE 	427
step 1: Test the Market conditions
Companies considering a sale generally hire a “sell-side”
investment bank to oversee the process of the company in a
timely and efficient manner. Investment bankers charge a
fee, typically, around 4–7 percent of the transaction amount,
along with a retainership. At this stage, a company would
invite investment bankers to propose terms and timelines and
to demonstrate their industry awareness and connections.
While these discussions ensue, the ineffective bankers will be
eager to take the assignment and, after collecting substantial
retainer fees, fail to deliver value. The low-level tactics include
proposing significantly higher valuations to snag the assign-
ment, and later, point to the buyer universe for poor outcomes.
On the other hand, the best of the breed may not be willing to
engage or sell something unless they believe the opportunity
is meaningfully attractive to the universe of acquirers — and
if they do, may propose a lower number to get the transaction
completed fast. The company should seek the right balance
between investment banker industry expertise, fee structures,
target valuation range, and target timelines of transaction.
Company boards identify the investment bankers who
have relevant knowledge of the challenges and opportunities
of a particular sector and market conditions. Investment bank-
ers are able to gauge the field, identify potential buyers, and
know the potential hurdles and buyer objections. In determin-
ing the company’s selling price, investment banks can provide
fair assessments of value by analyzing the company’s long-
term prospects and current financials. Beyond providing these
financial advisory services, investment banks identify poten-
tial buyers, solicit bids and review proposals, help companies
select the most attractive candidates, and participate in the
negotiations with interested parties.
At times, the value and visibility of the company may be
such that an investment banker may be unnecessary. Or con-
sider the approach of Heitzmann: “We deliberately built a
board with tentacles in the potential buyer’s market. You gen-
erally know someone — first-time entrepreneurs do not have
much of a network — and that’s where we come in. One of our

-- 457 of 546 --

428 	AcquIsITIONs
board members knew people at the acquiring company, and
that’s how it started,” he says.
step 2: Formalize the Process — Hire an Investment Banker
At this stage, the board would hire an investment banker who
will proceed within the following framework:
• 	Process metrics and timelines. Establish valuation guide-
lines, universe of potential acquirers, and steps/time-
lines for the process.
• 	Presentation materials. A teaser sheet, a set of slides, and
relevant information memorandum.
• 	First contact. At this point, the I-banker blasts emails to
the universe of acquirers, using teasers, which provide
high-level information to acquirers. Teasers are typically
a page or two long, with key highlights of the technol-
ogy, revenues, and growth potential. Teasers do not dis-
close the name of the company and offer only some key
points that get the buyers to the door to sign a nondis-
closure agreement.
• 	Screening the parties interested in the company. Once the inter-
ested parties have been identified and have signed non-
disclosure agreements, these would be prescreened. This
can be a nebulous step, as the goal of prescreening is to
eliminate those who are merely seeking information with-
out providing any insights into their process, motivations,
or criteria. And beware of tire kickers. Brad Feld cautions
that expressions of interest occur many times along the
way. “It could well be corporate development guys from
large companies just sucking info from entrepreneurs, or
staying busy, doing their job. They may have no money
but are wasting an entrepreneur’s time. We see many tire
kickers and can help our entrepreneurs to cut through the
noise — we know a lot of natural acquirers and we don’t
hesitate to call them when the time comes.” Also, after the
prescreening stage, companies choose to negotiate the
terms themselves, without any substantial involvement

-- 458 of 546 --

PuTTING THE cOMPANY uP FOR sALE 	429
from the I-bankers. Many intermediaries prefer to offer
advice on the various potential outcomes based on nego-
tiation parameters — mature I-bankers will seldom pre-
scribe one path over another. The ultimate decision lies
with the company. Gaurav Bhasin, managing director of
Allied Advisers, a Silicon Valley–based advisory firm, has
closed the sales of multiple VC-backed companies in the
United States, Europe, and Asia. He works with founders
and investors as a close confidant. “My role is to establish
trust with the founders and help them understand the
buyer’s viewpoint” he says. “We run a tight process with
our established and deep contacts in the buyer universe.
Bringing relationships to bear is an advantage, but we
also make sure founders can make data driven decisions.
For example, we analyzed over 13044 exit transactions
over a five year period and found that 89 percent of exits
are below $100m price points. If founders get emotionally
attached to irrationally large exit amounts, such details
can help them see the bigger picture.”
After a suitable buyer has been zeroed in on, the parties
proceed to stage two of the process:
• 	Execute a letter of intent. A letter of intent (LOI) estab-
lishes a level of commitment on both sides to proceed in
a diligent and a timely fashion to finish what has been
initiated. The LOI would include:
• 	Exclusivity. The seller is engaging with only one
party. This clause tilts the axis in favor of the buyer.
• 	Confidentiality. This clause protects the seller’s infor-
mation. A must-have clause that does not impact the
economic terms.
• 	Broad parameters of transaction terms.
• 	Due diligence
• 	Conditions to closing
• 	Employee matters
• 	Suggested timelines

-- 459 of 546 --

430 	AcquIsITIONs
• 	Buyers may choose to offer a nonbinding LOI, which is a
two-edged sword. Further, a weak yet binding LOI does
not accomplish much for the seller.
• 	Once the LOI has been executed, the buyer is aware of
the negotiating advantage that starts therein. Other suit-
ors usually step back at this point and the dance frenzy
intensifies. A seller needs to ensure that the LOI has
enough teeth in it to protect valuation and ensure that
the diligence is completed with a sense of urgency.
In describing the role of investment bankers, author Karen
Ho takes a scalpel to cut some carcasses open. Here is an hon-
est take on the “Process for a High Yield Deal” (from the desk
of an investment banking associate), which was symptomatic
malaise in the industry leading up to the 2008 financial crisis. 12
Investment Banking Process 	The Real Deal
Pitch prospective client. Tell them
how great we are at raising junk.
Lie, cheat, steal, and bad-
mouth your competitors to
win the business.
Build financial model: historical per-
formance and projected earnings
and leverage ratios.
Manipulate projection so
credit ratings are reason-
able.
Analyze comparable high-yield
issues to understand market rates
and returns.
Select the most aggressive
companies to show the
client.
Due diligence: Analyze the com-
pany and understand why it exists
and will it exist tomorrow.
Boondoggle: Build up your
frequent-flyer miles.
Drafting sessions: Craft the perfect
marketing document to bring to
market.
Eat M&M’s, ice cream bars,
and cookies. Get fat!!!
Prepare rating agency presentation. 	Mask the company’s weak-
nesses by concentrating on
one or two strengths.
Prepare road show presentation. 	Same as above — Goal: To
fool the investor.
Road show: Grueling 8 days on the
road.
Expense account: Go crazy
with the client’s money!!!

-- 460 of 546 --

PuTTING THE cOMPANY uP FOR sALE 	431
Most processes follow a similar undertone but occasionally
you may find a good banker, who is less about lying, cheating,
and bad mouthing and more about ensuring all parties walk
away with a fair advantage.
step 3: Do Your Due Diligence
Larger companies, and the buyer’s counsel, will engage in
deep due diligence. Sellers establish a data room with relevant
documents, which include:
• 	Corporate records. Certificate of incorporation, bylaws,
board minutes, and shareholders’ list.
• 	Business records. All material contracts of purchase, sale,
and supply agreements, research agreements, licensing
and distribution agreements and government contracts,
list of all assets and intellectual property.
• 	Financial records. All financial statements, receivables,
loan and equity agreements, tax records. Copies of all
placement memorandums, capitalization schedules, and
equity amounts.
• 	Employee records. All employee agreements, consultant
agreements, details of option plans and benefits (pen-
sion, health care) offered.
• 	Legal. Details of any litigation, pending or foreseen.
step 4: Negotiate/structure the Transaction
Typical elements of negotiation during the sell process include,
besides valuation, the following:
• 	Asset purchase versus stock purchase:
• 	Most acquisitions occur as asset purchases. This
eliminates any unknown or contingent liabili-
ties that a seller may assume as a result of stock
purchase. Assets can be chosen (“You keep those

-- 461 of 546 --

432 	AcquIsITIONs
desks and phone systems, we keep the IP and the
customers”) and allow for depreciation — a tax
advantage.
• 	In a stock purchase, the buyer can assume net operating
losses (NOL) that the seller may have accrued. These
may reduce the buyer’s tax liabilities and augment
the value. On the flip side, the buyer also assumes
all liabilities, known or unknown. And yes, those
old desks and archaic phone systems are a part
of the deal.
• 	Cash offering, part cash and part stock, or all-stock
transaction:
• 	All-cash transaction is preferred by sellers and ven-
ture investors. Buyers can finance such transactions
via external financings.
• 	Stock transactions allow the seller to gain long-term
economic advantages and to be a shareholder to
enjoy any advantages.
• 	Earnouts and escrows. A buyer may believe that the value
of the company lies in executing certain orders that gen-
erate revenues and cash flows or profits. Further, a buyer
may establish certain targets and milestones for such an
earnout. Jack Ahrens of TGap Ventures tries to minimize
any earnouts: “The company is going to be controlled
largely by the acquirer, and so are the resources — peo-
ple as well as cash. Things can get sticky pretty quickly
when motivations change,” he says. Depending on the
sector, practitioners advise that approximately 15 per-
cent of the value in earnouts is acceptable. In the phar-
maceutical sector, these percentages vary significantly
and depend on the stage of drug development. Escrow
percentages are 5–15 percent and periods (12–24 months)
are negotiated as buyer attempts to protect from any sur-
prises and contingencies.

-- 462 of 546 --

DEAL KILLERs 	433
• 	Other terms:
• 	Representations and warranties made by the tar-
get company
• 	Employees: Who stays, who goes
• 	Employee options: Vesting schedule and acceleration
• 	Indemnities offered by the target company
step 5: Approvals and closing
The board and shareholders approve the transaction. The clos-
ing, a process during which the attorneys and key stakehold-
ers execute final agreements, occurs on a set date. While these
would historically happen in person, typically at an attorney’s
office, many of these are done virtually nowadays. After all, if
signatures can be scanned and money can be wired, we do not
need the general assembly.
DEAL KILLERs
Acquirers walk away from opportunities for several reasons,
but the most critical deal-breakers are often alignment of inter-
ests and financial terms. For investors, the primary deal killer
is the value of an exit. Yet a young CEO may find an acqui-hire
offer appealing.
Understanding the buyer’s motivations is critical. The
value of the acquisition, pace of transaction, terms, and condi-
tions are often driven by the buyer’s ambitions.
Good recordkeeping is often underestimated by startup
CEOs, and it is often the onus of the board and investors to
ensure that all records are up to date. Material contracts, cap
tables, intellectual property assignments, and even timely pay-
ment of taxes can cause irritants in this process.

-- 463 of 546 --



-- 464 of 546 --

35
435
The initial public offering (IPO), or “going public,” holds a spe-
cial cachet in the world of VC-backed companies. Often marking
the coming of age of companies, entrepreneurs see it as the epit-
ome of success. But the regulatory and market complexities are
significant and have impacted the IPO dynamics significantly.
In the 1990s, an IPO was within reach for companies with
annual revenues of $30–50 million that showed a profitable
quarter and had a good board and management team. After
the dot-com crash of the 1990s, it was the larger, more mature
companies with revenues of $150+ million that were seen as
suitable candidates for public offering. This, combined with
regulatory challenges, had the effect of stretching out IPO
timelines for companies.
Ninety percent of firms surveyed separately indicate pur-
suing dual strategies in which they consider both an IPO filing
and a trade sale for their portfolios.1 Dual tracks offer a bet-
ter negotiation leverage. “Dual track for an exit? Now that is
a problem we’d love to have,” says Bryce Roberts of O’Relly
AlphaTech Ventures (OATV), an early-stage venture fund.
If the company is ready and the markets are favorable, the
public offering is certainly a better option because most acqui-
sitions don’t generate the killer returns that public offerings
do. Because IPO-ready companies can be affected by market
downturns and regulations, the volume of investment returns
for investors may be driven more by acquisitions than public
offerings. Consequently, acquisitions are efficient and faster
exit options.
Initial Public Offering

-- 465 of 546 --

436 	InItIal PublIc OfferIng
When a company decides to file for a public offering in
the United States, it registers its securities with the Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC) for sale to the general pub-
lic. From a business perspective, it is a culmination of a longer
strategic plan for the company. For entrepreneurs, the priority
is to expand capital resources by tapping into the public equity
markets for additional investors.
The benefits and costs are manifold. The advantages are
evident, including enabling access to capital, exposure, and
prestige; facilitating future acquisitions of other companies (via
partial payments in shares); enjoying access to multiple financ-
ing opportunities such as equity, convertible debt, and cheaper
bank loans; and developing increased liquidity.2 The costs are
also not to be ignored: loss of privacy as to matters regarding
business operations; competition; disclosure of executive offic-
ers’ compensation, material contracts, and customers; pressure
from shareholders to perform and meet market expectations;
time-consuming diplomacy in undergoing periodic reporting
to investors; and shareholder and regulatory compliance.
tHe IPO PrOceSS: tHe lOng anD WInDIng rOaD
The IPO journey can be divided into many different phases
in which the actual IPO is seen as a significant milestone in
an otherwise-complex structural transformation. According to
Ernst & Young’s Guide to Going Public, there are essentially three
main stages:3
1. Planning stage. The company commits to diligent prepa-
ration that includes conducting feasibility studies and
readiness checks on the business and financials itself, as
well as the market.
2. Execution or implementation stage. The right manage-
ment and advisory teams are established; financial
infrastructure and accounting, tax, operational, and IT
processes and systems are assessed; corporate structure

-- 466 of 546 --

tHe IPO PrOceSS: tHe lOng anD WInDIng rOaD 	437
and governance are established; and investor relations
and corporate communication strategies and plans are
managed.
3. Realization 	stage. 	Finally, 	the 	company 	reaches 	the
realization phase, where shares are priced and the IPO
transaction closes.
In the preparatory, planning stage, which takes place about
one to two years before the IPO is set to take place, a company
does its homework to assess the readiness to go IPO:
• 	Prepare a compelling business plan. The business plan
should be long-term, covering 24 to 36 months before
and after the IPO to provide a clear road map that can be
embedded early in the organization.
• 	Benchmark the portfolio company’s performance. Before
deciding to go public, companies monitor their perfor-
mance, tracking growth rates, sales performance, profita-
bility, and market share. Companies should also measure
themselves on other benchmarks, such as ensuring that
their products and services are well defined and assess-
ing their reputation among various market stakeholders
(e.g., customers, analysts, and investment banks). Aside
from financials, reputation and brand name are impor-
tant intangibles for leveraging a company’s strength in
the public markets.
• 	Is this a public-ready company? A compelling business track
record and a plan to demonstrate how IPO funds will
fuel growth is key. Is there growth? Rising profits? In the
management team, what expertise gaps need to be filled
for operating a public company? Also, does the company
have adequate budgetary systems in place with financial
information readily available on a monthly and quarterly
basis? What are the state of investor relationships and the
corporate structure for transparent reporting to share-
holders? In a survey of global institutional investors,

-- 467 of 546 --

438 	InItIal PublIc OfferIng
respondents ranked the top nonfinancial factors leading
to IPO success.4 In order of priority, these are:
• 	Management credibility and experience
• 	Quality of corporate strategy and its execution
• 	Brand strength and market position
• 	Operational effectiveness
• 	Corporate governance practices
In reviewing IPO trends of over 7,500 companies from 1980
to 2010, the median age of a company is eight years. The lowest
median age during these three decades was five years and the
highest median age was 15 years.5
After this soul-searching stage, the second stage is where the
company begins the practical preparation toward going IPO.
StePS tO an IPO
After an IPO readiness assessment is completed, the steps to
an IPO, as presented in Exhibit 35.1, include selection of under-
writers, conducting the road show, and demand assessment.
IPO
Readiness
Assessment
Select an
Underwriter
("Bake-off")
Complete
Regulatory
Filings/S-1
Conduct the
Road Show
Assess
Demand, Set
Share Prices
Exhibit 35.1 Steps to an IPO.

-- 468 of 546 --

StePS tO an IPO 	439
Consider the road map to IPO for a company like Google.
To comply with SEC rules, Google had to consider disclosing
its financial information. It found itself in a position where it
had more than 500 shareholders and had 120 days from the end
of the year to file the financial statements. Google faced three
choices: buy back shares from some shareholders, report finan-
cials publicly without selling any shares, or go public. Google
had to present its financials by 2:00 p.m. and three hours ahead
of this deadline, at 11:00 a.m., the company announced that it
would be going public. 6 Prior to filing, Google realized neither
of the exchanges NASDAQ or NYSE would list the offering,
as they were short of three board members. Google was able
to add three heavy hitters quickly — the president of Stanford
University, the president of Intel, and the CEO of Genentech.
Companies preparing for IPO take special care in building
an independent and a strong board that offers a broad mix of
skills — from industry networks, technical knowledge, and
expertise in business development to acquisition integration
and financial analysis.
Hire an underwriter: the “bake-Off”
Investment banks compete for the issuing company’s business
during a process known as the “beauty contest” or “bake-off.”
The investment banks present their credentials to the compa-
ny’s board of directors, as well as their view of market condi-
tions and challenges.
The word underwriter is said to have come from the prac-
tice of having each risk-taker write his or her name under the
total amount of risk that they were willing to accept at a speci-
fied premium. In a way, this is still true today. An underwrit-
ing syndicate brings new issues to market. Each firm takes the
responsibility (and risk) of selling its specific allotment.
Underwriters or investment banks are hired to raise invest-
ment capital from investors on behalf of the company. This is a
way of selling a newly issued security, such as common stock,
to investors. Syndicates of banks (the lead managers) typically
underwrite the transaction, which means they have taken on the

-- 469 of 546 --

440 	InItIal PublIc OfferIng
risk of distributing the securities. Underwriters make their income
from the price difference (the underwriting spread) between the
price they pay the issuer and what they collect from investors or
from broker-dealers who buy portions of the offering.
Google ended up with 31 underwriters — a long list, indic-
ative of the eagerness of the middlemen. Several would drop
off eventually. Credit Suisse and Morgan Stanley ended up
with their names on the S1 filings.
file the S-1/Prospectus and avoid the Media
Any company intending to go public is required to file a legal
document known as the prospectus with the SEC. Registra-
tion is a two-part documentation process that involves Form
S-1. Part 1 covers the prospectus, which serves as the primary
documentation of disclosure to investors, detailing the opera-
tions and financial conditions of the company. Part 2 covers the
supplemental information furnished to the SEC (copies of con-
tracts, etc.). Once the SEC approves the company’s registration
statement, a final prospectus is released to investors.
The prospectus, which reads much like a business plan,
includes the company’s financial history and growth strat-
egy, the details of its offering, and information on company
management. It also outlines industry competition and other
risk factors that investors would want to know in advance. In
essence, the prospectus provides all the information investors
need to know in order to decide whether to participate in the
IPO. The preliminary prospectus is also known as a red herring
because of the red ink used on the front page, which indicates
that some information — including the price and size of the
offering — is subject to change.
As soon as a company files a preliminary prospectus with
the SEC, the quiet period begins. The company is prohibited
from distributing any information not included in the pro-
spectus. This period lasts for 25 days post-IPO, after the shares
start trading.
Sergey Brin and Larry Page did several things noteworthy
at the time of the Google IPO, but the Playboy interview was the

-- 470 of 546 --

StePS tO an IPO 	441
one that almost got them crossways with the SEC during the
quiet period. A week before its celebrated IPO, the SEC caught
wind of this interview, which had been conducted about five
months prior. Eventually, this interview was included in its
entirety in the S-1 Prospectus as Appendix B. Playboy lost the
exclusive interview to an inane SEC rule, and the media made
some hay about it, as did the late-night comedians. As CEO
Eric Schmidt quipped, it was a generic article, “without any
pictures, I might add.”7 Phew!
the road Show: Which city are We In, again?
Google did not have to struggle much with a road show, as it
decided to go down the Dutch auction path for selling its shares
to the public. But the underwriter typically schedules dozens
of meetings across the country. The CEO, and typically also the
CFO and other key executives, will join the tour, during which
the company pitches its business plan to institutional investors:
mutual funds, endowments, or pension funds. At these meetings,
the underwriter attempts to gauge the level of interest in the IPO,
which helps lead to a decision on how to price the stock offering.
Book building is the process by which an underwriter attempts
to determine at what price to offer an IPO based on demand from
institutional investors. An underwriter builds a book by accept-
ing orders from fund managers indicating the number of shares
they desire and the price they are willing to pay. The book runner
is the managing or lead underwriter who maintains, or runs, the
books of securities sold for a new issue. Often, the book runner
is given credit for the total size of the deal.8 Following the road
show, the company prints its final prospectus, distributes it to
potential investors, and files it with the SEC.
great Demand, or Put It on Ice?
After all the road show presentations are complete, if the
demand from the institutions is feeble, the underwriters will
recommend that you put the offering on ice. Let it chill. And
someday, hopefully, it will be springtime. On some occasions,
you might find a competing company go public at the same

-- 471 of 546 --

442 	InItIal PublIc OfferIng
time, causing some unintended effects. “We went public the
same day that Playboy Enterprises went public. At the same
price. And one of the analysts says, ‘The market has spoken.
It’s memories over mammaries, 10-to-1,’” Gordon Moore, co-
founder of Intel recalled their IPO with a chuckle.9
not an endgame but a financing event 	According to Ernst &
Young, around 70 percent of startup companies fail before they
reach their IPO potential, with the majority of successful IPOs
mostly around for at least five years before the transition. 10
Once on the public market, these companies must compete
with other IPOs. Only 8 percent of offerings are competitive
in terms of value and fair market value offered by peers in the
industry.11
The metamorphosis from a private company to a pub-
licly listed company is a daunting process, requiring massive
strategic planning and cost-benefit analysis of markets and
products, value chain activities, infrastructure (e.g., business
information systems, compensation, plans, and redundant
assets), governance and management structures, and other
business components — from both financial and legal per-
spectives. 12 The process itself, timed from the decision to go
public to the day the IPO transactions are closed, varies sig-
nificantly. Several factors will affect the timeline, such as how
well the process is planned, how well the company is posi-
tioned in the market, the abilities of the management team
and advisors, as well as factors outside the control of com-
panies, such as market conditions and the current regulatory
environment. 13
timing the Market 	Researchers point out that when public
markets are favorable, the experienced venture capitalists are
quick to take advantage. After assessing over 40,000 transac-
tions spanning over two decades, the authors concluded that
not only are the investments of the specialized VC organiza-
tions more successful, but there is no appreciable degradation
with changing conditions.14

-- 472 of 546 --

IPO unDerPrIcIng anD DutcH auctIOnS 	443
IPO unDerPrIcIng anD DutcH auctIOnS
The goal when pricing an IPO should be to establish an offer-
ing price that is low enough to stimulate interest in the stock
but high enough to raise an adequate amount of capital for the
company. The process of determining an optimal price usually
involves the underwriters (syndicate) arranging share pur-
chase commitments from leading institutional investors.
In order to balance the needs of the investor and the issu-
ing company, the investment bank traditionally tries to price a
deal so that the first-day pop is about 15 percent. 15 This is a nice
gift that benefits underwriters (the company pays the price)
and their institutional investor friends — this incestuous cycle
may seal the next investment opportunity that may be led by
the underwriter.
Underwriters may claim that the effect of initial underpric-
ing of an IPO generates additional interest in the stock when it
first becomes publicly traded. But in reality, those institutional
friends make an instant 15 percent. This results in money left
on the table — lost capital that could have gone to the com-
pany had the stock been offered at a higher price. The com-
pany all along believes that the underwriters are representing
its interests, but in reality, the underwriters want to just get the
deal done quickly — the costs can be borne by the company,
after all.
According to Professor Jay Ritter, over 50 years, IPOs in the
United States have been underpriced by 16.8 percent on aver-
age. This translates to more than $125 billion that companies
have left on the table. IPO pricing is also a worldwide phe-
nomenon. In China, the underpricing has been severe, averag-
ing 137.4 percent from 1990 to 2010. This compares with 16.3
percent in Britain from 1959 to 2009. In most other countries,
IPO underpricing averages above 20 percent.16
The danger of overpricing is an important consideration for
venture investors. If a stock is offered to the public at a higher
price than the market will pay, the underwriters may have trou-
ble meeting their commitments to sell shares. Even if they sell
all the issued shares, if the stock falls in value on the first day of

-- 473 of 546 --

444 	InItIal PublIc OfferIng
trading, it may lose its marketability and hence even more of its
value. This can have emotional consequences, and hence most
companies would rather succumb to the 15 percent loss.
Information asymmetry: the bigger fool theory of IPO
underpricing
Kevin Rock of Harvard Business School pointed out that the
IPO price is observable and does not correspond to a unique
level of demand, which is unobservable. Like a one-sided mar-
ketplace, buyers still don’t know who is willing to buy at the
set share price and if the offering will be accepted en masse or
selectively.
Until this asymmetry resolves, there is an inequilibrium.
During this time, the informed investor has an opportunity to
profit from his knowledge by bidding for “mispriced” securi-
ties. In this way, the informed investor is compensated for his
due diligence into the asset’s value and obtains some upside
for showing where capital should best be allocated. The unin-
formed investors compete with the informed, and the issuer
must ultimately compensate them for their disadvantage. In
other words, the bigger fools pay the price. But we need the
fools so that the smarter investors can make money.
“The underwriters, however, need the uninformed inves-
tors to bid, since informed investors do not exist in sufficient
number. To solve this problem, the underwriter reprices the IPO
to bring in these investors and ensure that uninformed investors
bid. The consequence is underpricing,” writes Professor Steven
Davidoff.17 If the investment bankers tilt the scale to only the
smarter buyers, the advantages evaporate. For the pop to occur,
you need the foolish and the greedy in large quantities. Davidoff
writes, “When investment banks can allocate shares in greater
measure to informed investors, the underpricing is reduced
since the compensation needed to draw uninformed investors
is lower. Underpricing has also been found to be lower when
information about the issuer is more freely available so that
uninformed investors are at less of a disadvantage.”18

-- 474 of 546 --

IPO unDerPrIcIng anD DutcH auctIOnS 	445
the Dutch auction: eliminate the Pop and those Middlemen
Google is an unconventional company in every way — even its
IPO was a case study of sorts. Eric Schmidt, CEO of Google, did
not like this pop — this 15 percent that should be in the hands
of the company — and pushed for a Dutch auction. “I know
this may sound like baloney, but we settled decisively on the
Dutch auction after we got a letter from a little old lady who
asked why she couldn’t make money from the IPO the way
the stockbrokers would. We thought she had a point about the
basic fairness of the system,” he wrote.19
A Dutch auction is an attempt to minimize the extreme
underpricing that underwriters establish. In a Dutch auction,
individuals could log on to their brokerage accounts and bid
for a certain number of shares, say 500 shares. Or bid for shares
for a certain amount, say $1,000. After the auction was com-
pleted, the company would establish a price and the individ-
ual bidders would receive a certain allocation of shares. “We
liked this approach because it was consistent with the auction-
based business model we used to sell our ads — it had a strong
intuitive appeal for us,” Schmidt would say.20
Such auctions threaten large fees otherwise payable to
underwriter syndicates. Google had as many as 31 under-
writers at the table when contemplating the IPO path, but it
ignored the conventional. Although not the first company to
use Dutch auction, no company the size of Google had ever
done such a thing. Google’s share price rose 17 percent in its
first day of trading despite the auction method. Wall Street was
angry — it felt left out of one of the biggest IPOs of the time.
“Don’t bother to bid on this shot-in-the-dark IPO,” said Busi-
nessWeek. The Wall Street Journal ran a front-page article, “How
Miscalculation and Hubris Hobbled Celebrated Google IPO.”
Miffed underwriters actively discouraged institutional inves-
tors from buying, to punish Google, reduce demand, and send
the initial price down. But for Google, a successful IPO was
one where average investors, not necessarily big institutions,
eventually gained from the underpricing.

-- 475 of 546 --

446 	InItIal PublIc OfferIng
POSt IPO: SHOulD Vcs StaY engageD?
After the rapture and thrill of the IPO settles and the
tombstones have been proudly distributed, a question comes
up: Should a VC stay involved with a public company? A suc-
cessful IPO outcome is a financing event and not a guarantee
of long-term success of the company. With analysts and share-
holders eagerly watching the ticker price run across the board
at the stock exchange, the CEO is under pressure to deliver
consistent earnings and growth. And this leads to an interest-
ing conundrum for any practitioner: Should I stay and help
the CEO become successful? Or should I keep my fiduciary
responsibility to my LPs and move on to the next portfolio
company? No easy answers here. Lip-Bu Tan of Walden Inter-
national says, “I think it is a big mistake when a VC resigns
from the board when a company is going public. That’s when
the CEO needs the most help. Being a public company is very
unforgiving — the CEO is in the public eye and trying to live
life by the quarterly earnings, and with a VC’s skills and exper-
tise, you can help the CEO and the company to become a stable
and a strong company.”21
Seth Rudnick of Canaan Partners, who has led at least half
a dozen companies to the IPO stage, differs in his views. “As a
venture investor, you’re looking at a number of metrics: What’s
best for the company, what’s the IRR that you’re getting for
your investors? How do all the other investors in the company
benefit? And those are all very complicated decisions.” Rud-
nick says, “Frankly, at Canaan Partners we strongly urge all of
our partners who are in companies that go public to get off the
boards so that the decisions then become simply those that you
would make as an investor rather than as a board member.”
He observed, “I think you get too confounded, you know; you
love the company, you want to stay on it, you want to stay
involved but the dynamics are much different now.”22
For Brad Feld of the Foundry Group, the choice is easy.
“Forget your ego, do what your LPs want you to do,” he
says. 23 For a VC who is engaged with a public company, the
responsibilities and liabilities become significant. Reporting,

-- 476 of 546 --

POSt IPO: SHOulD Vcs StaY engageD? 	447
disclosures, insurance, insider trading issues — the game
changes substantially. Factors such as the performance of the
company, publicity, and liability risk are key parameters of
consideration for any VC who wishes to stay on the board of
a publicly traded company. In the proverbial limelight, pub-
lic companies have a strong incentive to avoid any negative
publicity that will adversely affect the stock price. Delivering
financial statements in a transparent and timely way, whether
annually or quarterly, gives investors and analysts continued
assurance and confidence in the company.
As companies are traded publicly, limited partners often
pressure VCs to sell these stocks and return capital to inves-
tors. While these dynamics are dependent on LP–GP terms,
investors are eager to gain liquidity, especially after a long
investment horizon. On the flip side, the VCs may believe
these stocks have latent value and the price can only go up.
For some VCs, their IRR, and their careers are also at stake. The
timing and decision of sale is a perennial debate. Diana Frazier
of FLAG Capital, a fund of funds managing over $6 billion,
points out, “There were two venture funds that had significant
investments in Google. One fund sold their stock at the time of
the IPO, the other one held on for much longer. No marks for
guessing who made more money.”
While IPOs are the pinnacle of all exits, secondary sales and
private exchanges have evolved. Early investors and founders
can enjoy partial liquidity, thanks to these exit options.

-- 477 of 546 --



-- 478 of 546 --

36
449
Until recently, the prospect of selling shares of private compa-
nies could have been a challenge. A few big-name companies
in the past decade have allowed for the creation of secondary
markets, prior to which it was inefficient for the investors on
Sand Hill Road to enjoy a partial liquidity event. Wide-open
exchanges for private company shares were pretty much
nonexistent.
Now the trading of shares for private technology firms
is becoming more the norm, with Nasdaq SecondMarkets,
EquitZen, Forge (formerly Equidate), and SharesPost. Venture
capitalists have relied on two primary exit options: a trade sale
via an acquisition or the IPO. Most firms that remain private
offer some kind of ownership or stake to employees, venture
capitalists, and other institutional investors. Some of these
want to cash out, while others want to buy more. In the past,
employees in private companies couldn’t sell their shares.
Also, VC funds are 10-year closed-end funds. Finally, in an
economic environment hostile to IPOs, a venue for entrepre-
neurs, venture capitalists, and employees to cash out makes
sense. All these challenges presented a ripe opportunity for
innovative trading solutions — an if-you-build-it-they-will-
come proposition.
Private exchanges generally function by having an interme-
diary take shares from sellers or companies and actively find
buyers, a process that can drag into weeks — completely out
of sync with the fast-paced world of trading. Such exchanges
simplify the process by offering an auction-style system,
Secondary Sales

-- 479 of 546 --

450 	Secondary SaleS
formalizing the market-clearing process with more ease and
transparency. Greg Brogger of SharesPost has cited angel
investors and senior management of private companies as big
users: “Those people are not necessarily looking to sell all of
their position in a company, but want some amount of liquid-
ity for their shares.”1
Early investors are especially keen on the legitimate transi-
tion/exit as a way to cash in some of their earnings. Accel Part-
ners sold about 15 percent of its stake in Facebook, then valued
over $500 million, via secondary markets. 2 While still a frac-
tion of what is traded in public exchanges like the New York
Stock Exchange and Nasdaq, private exchanges have brought
a much-needed third exit option to venture practitioners.
Strong investor attention to companies on private exchanges
acts as a barometer of success and could prompt bullish inter-
est in firms before they debut on the public market. Yet,
according to reports in the Wall Street Journal,3 companies have
attempted to control pre-IPO trading, as online trading could
lead to speculative swings in share price affecting companies’
stock-based incentives for employees, and spread information
about privately held companies too widely. Individual inves-
tors are often excluded from purchasing shares of some of the
most popular private technology companies before they have
held an IPO, with institutions preferred as buyers. Widespread
online sales of private shares placed the burden on companies
to approve scores of transactions and brought in an unwieldy
mass of shareholders with varying agendas. Such trading ave-
nues also impacted employee morale and caused distraction
where employees would sell their shares and quit. Companies
now allow employees and other stakeholders to sell shares in
narrow windows of time.
Any investor would welcome these models where friction
in venture capital transactions is minimized and holdings need
not be locked up for as much as 10 years.

-- 480 of 546 --

451
Notes
Preface
1. C. P. Cavafy, “Ithaka,” Collected Poems Revised Edition,
translated by Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard, edited
by George Savidis. Translation copyright © 1975, 1992 by
Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard. Princeton Univer-
sity Press. https://www.onassis.org/initiatives/cavafy-
archive/the-canon/ithaka.
2. “James 4:13–14,” Holy Bible, English Standard Version UK
(London: Harper Collins, 2012).
3. José Luis A. Fermosel, “Jorge Lui Borges: ‘No estoy seguro
de que yo exista in realidad,’” El País, September 25, 1981.
4. Rudyard Kipling, “If,” Rewards and Fairies. (Garden City,
NY: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1910).
5. Ashwin Rodrigues, “Group of White Men in Patagonia
Vests Confused for VC Fund, Raise $500 Million,” Fortune,
September 29, 2017.
Chapter 1: The Business of Cash and Carry
1. “SoftBank: Inside the ‘Wild West’ $100bn Fund Shaking up
the Tech World,” Financial Times, June 19, 2018: https://www.
ft.com/content/71ad7cda-6ef4-11e8-92d3-6c13e5c92914.
Chapter 2: Why Choose a Career in VC
1. Donald T. Valentine, “Early Bay Area Venture Capitalists:
Shaping the Economic and Business Landscape,” an oral

-- 481 of 546 --

452 	NoTes
history conducted by Sally Smith Hughes in 2009, Regional
Oral History Office, The Bancroft Library, University of
California, Berkeley, 2010.
2. Author interview, October 2010.
3. CNNMoney, “The Keys to Andreessen Horowitz’s Suc-
cess,” YouTube video, February 6, 2012, http://www
.youtube.com/watch?v=PbW-1k3ZOA4.
Chapter 4: Welcome to the Land of Ad-Venture
1. Hank Paulson, 2004 — this was well before the 2008 finan-
cial crisis, during which Goldman Sachs was described as
a giant vampire squid.
2. Sarah Tavel, Adenturista blog, accessed on July 3, 2010,
www.adventurista.com/2008/04/vc-pre-mba-hiring.html.
3. This bizarre position description was posted on LinkedIn for
a family office based in California. I could NOT make this up.
4. Gary Rivlin, “So You Want to Be a Venture Capital-
ist,” New York Times, May 22, 2005, accessed January
13, 	2011, 	www.nytimes.com/2005/05/22/business/
yourmoney/22venture.html.
5. Michael Carney, “At Benchmark, “Good Judgment Comes
from Experience, Which Comes from Bad Judgment,”
July 26, 2013, Pandodaily website, http://pandodaily.
com/2013/07/26/at-benchmark-good-judgment-comes-
from-experience-which-comes-from-bad-judgement/.
6 John Doerr, “Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers,” in Done
Deals — Venture Capitalists Tell Their Stories, ed. Udayan
Gupta (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2000), 374.
7. Robert Nelsen (ARCH Venture Partners) in discussions
with the author, December 2010.
8. David Cowan (Bessemer Venture Partners) in discussions
with the author, December 2010.
9. Union Square Ventures, “We’re Hiring,” accessed Novem-
ber 23, 2010, unionsquareventures.com/2008/02/were-
hiring.php.

-- 482 of 546 --

NoTes 	453
10. A remora, also called a suckerfish, grows to about three
feet in length. Using its suction cups, it attaches itself to a
larger fish, typically a shark. The relationship, termed as
commensalism, is a one-way benefit to the remora with no
distinct advantage to the shark. The remora hitches a ride
and feeds off the shark’s leftovers. In fact, there is a con-
troversy as to whether a remora’s diet is primarily leftover
fragments or its host’s feces.
11. Rahim 2003, The Daily Princetonian.
12. Rajeev Batra (Mayfield Fund) in discussions with the
author, December 2010.
13. Steve Arnold, Jonathan Flint, and Terrance McGuire,
“Polaris Venture Partners,” in Done Deals—Venture Capital-
ists Tell Their Stories, ed. Udayan Gupta (Boston: Harvard
Business School Press, 2000), 281
14. Source: http://paulgraham.com/startupfunding.html.
15. Blake Masters, “Class 8 Notes Essay—The Pitch,” May 2,
2012, http://blakemasters.com/post/22271192791/peter-
thiels-cs183-startup-class-8-notes-essay.
16. Punit Chiniwalla in discussions with the author, Sep-
tember 2010.
17. Society of Kauffman Fellows, “Frequently Asked Ques-
tions,” accessed January 13, 2011, www.kauffmanfellows.
org/faq.aspx.
18. David Cassak, “John Simpson: Reluctant Entrepreneur,” In
Vivo: The Business & Medicine Report 21, no. 3 (April 2003),
accessed January 13, 2011, www.denovovc.com/press/
denovo-simpson.pdf.
19. Peter J. Tanous, Investment Visionaries: Lessons in Creating
Wealth from the World’s Greatest Risk Takers (Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003), 69.
20. C. Richard Kramlich, “Venture Capital Greats: A Conversa-
tion with C. Richard Kramlich,” interview by Mauree Jane
Perry, 2006, accessed January 13, 2011, http://digitalassets.lib.
berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/text/kramlich_dick_donated.pdf.

-- 483 of 546 --

454 	NoTes
21. NEA was then a mere $125 million fund. Today, NEA’s
committed capital exceeds $11 billion.
22. “Boston Scientific Announces Offer to Acquire Guidant
at $80 per Share,” news release, http://bostonscientific.
mediaroom.com/index.php?s=43&item=376.
23. Gary Rivlin, “So You Want to Be a Venture Capitalist.”
24. Ibid.
25. Jan expressed this at the board meeting of Michigan Ven-
ture Capital Association. Trust me, I was in the room when
she said that.
26. Seth Levine’s VC Adventure blog, “How to Become a Venture
Capitalist,” accessed on November 23, 2010, http://www.
sethlevine.com/wp/2005/05/how-to-become-a-venture-
capitalist.
27. Source: From the documentary Something Ventured, 2011,
Produced by Paul Holland, Foundation Capital.
Chapter 5: Developing Your Investment Career
1. William H. Draper, III, “Early Bay Area Venture Capital-
ists: Shaping the Economic and Business Landscape,”
interview by Sally Smith Hughes, 2008, accessed January
13, 2011, http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/
text/draper_william.pdf.
2. Andrew Adams Schoen, “Quantum Computing: Time for
Venture Capitalists to Put Chips on the Table,” LinkedIn,
March 19, 2016, www.linkedin.com/pulse/quantum-com-
puting-time-venture-capitalists-put-chips-table-schoen/
accessed on August 25, 2019.
3. C. Richard Kramlich, “Venture Capital Greats: A Conver-
sation with C. Richard Kramlich,” interview by Mauree
Jane Perry.
4. Donald T. Valentine, “Early Bay Area Venture Capitalists:
Shaping the Economic and Business Landscape,” inter-
view by Sally Smith Hughes, 2009, accessed January 13,
2011, 	http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/
text/valentine_donald.pdf.
5. Rob Hayes, in discussion with the author, October 2010.

-- 484 of 546 --

NoTes 	455
6. Paul Bancroft III, “Early Bay Area Venture Capitalists:
Shaping the Economic and Business Landscape,” interview
by Sally Smith Hughes, 2010, accessed January 13, 2011,
http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/text/
bancroft_pete.pdf.
7. Tim Ferris, Tribe of Mentors (New York: Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2017).
8. McRaney describes the case of a brain-tumor patient who
lost his emotional responses and became a complete wreck,
as he could not make any decisions.
9. Source: http://www.paulgraham.com/guidetoinvestors.
html
10. Rivlin, “So You Want to Be a Venture Capitalist,” New York
Times, May 22, 2005.
11. James R. Swartz, “Venture Capital Greats: A Conversation
with James R. Swartz,” interview by Mauree Jane Perry,
2006, accessed January 13, 2011, http://digitalassets.lib.
berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/text/swartz_james_donated.pdf.
12. Reid Dennis, “Early Bay Area Venture Capitalists: Shaping
the Economic and Business Landscape,” interview by Sally
Smith Hughes, 2009, accessed January 13, 2011, http://
digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/text/dennis_
reid.pdf.
13. William K. Bowes, Jr., “Early Bay Area Venture Capital-
ists: Shaping the Economic and Business Landscape,”
interview by Sally Smith Hughes, 2008, accessed January
13, 2011, http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/
text/bowes_william.pdf.
14. Source: Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point: How Little
Things Can Make a Difference (New York: Little Brown, 2000).
15. Terry McGuire (Co-Founder, Polaris Ventures, and Chair-
man Emeritus of the National Venture Capital Associa-
tion), in discussion with the author, November 2010.
16. Blake Masters, “Peter Thiel’s CS183: Startup Class 8 Notes
Essay,” May 2, 2012, blog, http://blakemasters.com/
post/22271192791/peter-thiels-cs183-startup-class-8-
notes-essay.

-- 485 of 546 --

456 	NoTes
Chapter 6: A Career Where enemies Accumulate
1. Michael Moritz, Return to the Little Kingdom: How Apple and
Steve Jobs Changed the World (New York: Overlook Press,
2009), 89.
2. Inside the Minds: Venture Capitalists (ebrandedbooks.com,
2000).
3. Blake Masters, “Peter Thiel’s CS183: Startup — Class 7
Notes Essay,” April 26, 2012, blog, http://blakemasters.
com/post/21869934240/peter-thiels-cs183-startup-class-7-
notes-essay.
4. Marc Andreessen, “A Panorama of Venture Capital and
Beyond.” Stanford University’s Entrepreneurship Corner,
May 13, 2010, http://ecorner.stanford.edu/authorMaterial-
Info.html?mid=2457.
5. Tarang Shah and Sheetal Shah, Venture Capitalists at Work
(New York: APress, 2011).
6. A fictional town in the US state of Minnesota. Garrison
Keillor made this term popular as he reports the news
from Lake Wobegon on the radio show A Prairie Home
Companion.
7. Chris Dixon, “Being Friendly Has Become a Competitive
Advantage in VC,” January 29, 2010, blog, http://cdixon.
org/2010/01/29/being-friendly-has-become-a-competitive-
advantage-in-vc/.
Chapter 7: Generational Transfer and succession
1. The Tim Ferris Show #373: Interview with Jerry Colonna.
Chapter 8: LP Universe
1. YaleNEWS, “Yale Endowment Grows by 8.9%, a Gain of
$1.4 Billion,” September 24, 2010, Asset Allocation Data
as of June 30, 2010, http://opac.yale.edu/news/article.
aspx?id=7789.

-- 486 of 546 --

NoTes 	457
2. How Do Sovereign Wealth Funds Invest? by Elliot Hen-
tov, PhD, head of Policy and Research, Official Institutions
Group, and Alexander Petrov, Associate (who probably did
all the hard work), Policy Research, Official Institutions
Group — State Street Global Advisors, 2019.
Chapter 10: How LPs Conduct Fund Due Diligence
1. Paul A. Gompers and Josh Lerner, “What Drives Venture
Capital Fundraising?” January 1999, available at http://
ssrn.com/abstract=57935.
2. Sources of Capital for Michigan Venture Capital Firms and
Entrepreneurial Companies. Research report, Professor
Zsuzsanna Fluck, director — Center for Venture Capital,
Private Equity and Entrepreneurial Finance, Michigan State
University, 2007.
3. Lisa Edgar (Top Tier Capital Partners) in discussion with the
author, March 2011.
4. Georganne Perkins (Fisher Lynch Capital) in discussion
with the author, January 2011.
5. Kenneth Van Heel (Dow Chemical Company) in discus-
sions with the author, June 2010.
6. Private Equity International, The Guide to Private Equity Fund
Investment Due Diligence (London: PEI Media, 2003), 91.
The survey included responses from 313 institutions, of
which 70 percent were North America–based, with primary
investing in PE and venture capital.
Chapter 11: Defining Your Fund’s Investment strategy
1. Peter F. Drucker, Innovation and Entrepreneurship (Oxford:
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1985), xiv.
2. Ibid.
3. David Cowan, “Road Map Investing,” Who Has Time for
This?, August 12, 2005, blog, http://whohastimeforthis.
blogspot.com/2005/08/road-map-investing.html.
4. Ibid.

-- 487 of 546 --

458 	NoTes
Chapter 12: Investment Team Diligence
1. Kelly DePonte (Probitas Partners) in discussions with the
author, September 2010.
2. AltAssets, 	“Institutional 	Investor 	Profile: 	Clint 	Har-
ris, Managing Partner, Grove Street Advisors,” Septem-
ber 4, 2002.
3. Paul Bancroft III, “Early Bay Area Venture Capitalists:
Shaping the Economic and Business Landscape,” inter-
view by Sally Smith Hughes, 2010, accessed January 13,
2011, 	http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/
text/bancroft_pete.pdf.
4. Geoffrey H. Smart, Steven N. Payne, and Hidehiko Yuzaki,
“What Makes a Successful Venture Capitalist?” The Journal
of Private Equity 3, no. 4 (2000): 7–29.
5. Paul Gompers, Anna Kovner, and Josh Lerner, “Specializa-
tion and Success: Evidence from Venture Capital,” Journal of
Economics & Management Strategy 18, no. 3 (2009): 817–844.
6. Young Venture Capital Society Newsletter 1, no. 2.
7. Zarutskie Rebecca, “The Role of Top Management Team
Human Capital in Venture Capital Markets: Evidence
from First-Time Funds,” Journal of Business Venturing
25 (2010): 155–172.
8. Yael V. Hochberg, Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu,
“Networking as a Barrier to Entry and the Competitive
Supply of Venture Capital,” Journal of Finance 65, no. 3
(2010): 829–859. The authors conclude that there is less
entry in venture capital markets in which incumbents are
more tightly networked with each other. And the relation-
ship factor seems to work both ways: a venture capital firm
is significantly more likely to enter a market if it has previ-
ously established ties to incumbents by inviting them into
syndicates in its own home market. In other words, VCs
will not cooperate with an outsider until they have quid
pro quo access to the outsider’s markets.
9. Ibid.

-- 488 of 546 --

NoTes 	459
10. Alan Frazier, “Venture Capital Greats: A Conversation with
Alan Frazier,” interview by Carole Kolker, 2009, accessed
January 13, 2011, http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/
roho/ucb/text/frazier_alan_donated.pdf.
11. Steve Bird, “Private Equity . . . or Personal Equity? Why
Who You Know Still Drives Venture Capital Returns,”
July 7, 2005, accessed February 20, 2011, www.go4venture.
com/content/Case%20for%20Late%20Stage%20VC%20
(July%202005).pdf.
Chapter 13: Fund size and Portfolio Construction
1. Source: NVCA Yearbook, 2018 and Pitchbook
2. Lisa Edgar, “Are We Going to Make Money in This Fund?”
PEHub (blog), www.pehub.com/81521/are-we-going-to-
make-money-in-this-fund.
Chapter 14: Performance Analysis
1. John C. Kelleher and Justin J. MacCormack, “Internal Rate of
Return: A Cautionary Tale,” McKinsey Quarterly, August 2004,
accessed February 20, 2011, http://www.mckinseyquarterly.
com Internal rate_of_return_A_cautionary_tale_1481.
2. FLAG Capital Management, “Behind the Benchmarks: The
Art of Private Capital Performance Assessment,” Novem-
ber 2009, accessed February 20, 2011, www.flagcapi-
tal.com/pdf/Insights%202009%20November%20-%20
Behind%20the%20Benchmarks.pdf.
3. AltAssets, “Institutional Investor Profile: Clint Harris,
Managing Partner, Grove Street Advisors,” September 4,
2002, accessed February 20, 2011, www.altassets.com/
private-equity-features/by-author-name/article/
nz1183.html.
4. Robert S. Harris, Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan,
“Private Equity Performance: What Do We Know?” (July
2013). Journal of Finance, forthcoming. Fama-Miller Work-
ing Paper; Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 11-44;
Darden Business School Working Paper No. 1932316.

-- 489 of 546 --

460 	NoTes
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1932316 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1932316.
5. These can be accessed at http://ilpa.org/ilpa-standard
ized-reporting-templates.
6. FLAG Capital Management, “Behind the Benchmarks:
The Art of Private Capital Performance Assessment,”
November 2009, accessed February 20, 2011, www.flagcapi
tal.com/pdf/Insights%202009%20November%20-%20
Behind%20the%20Benchmarks.pdf.
7. David F. Swensen, Pioneering Portfolio Management: An
Unconventional Approach to Institutional Investment (New
York: Free Press, 2009), 75.
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. Anonymous institutional investor in discussions with the
author, September 2010.
Chapter 15: Terms of Fund Investment
1. Seth Levine (Foundry Group) in discussions with the author,
December 2010.
2. Kelly DePonte (Probitas Partners), in discussion with the
author, August 2010.
3. ILPA, “Private Equity Principles 2.0,” accessed January
17, 	2011, 	http://ilpa.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/
ILPA-Private-Equity-Principles-2.0.pdf.
4. Timothy Recker, in discussion with the author, December
2010.
5. Liam Donohue (.406 Ventures) in discussions with the
author, December 2010.
6. Colin Blaydon and Fred Wainwright, Tuck School of Busi-
ness at Dartmouth, “Limited Partnership Agreement Pro-
ject: Results of GP and LP Survey,” accessed January 17,
2011, http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pecenter/research/
pdfs/LPA_survey_summary.pdf.

-- 490 of 546 --

NoTes 	461
7. Kelly Williams (Credit Suisse), in discussions with the
author, February 2011.
8. Anonymous institutional LP, managing $30 billion in assets,
in discussions with the author, October 2010.
9. Preqin Investor Outlook: Private Equity, “The Opinions of
100 Leading Private Equity LPs on the Market and Their
Plans in 2011.” https://docs.preqin.com/reports/Preqin_
Private_Equity_Investor_Survey_Q1_2011x.pdf.
Chapter 16: The Venture Firm’s ethos, Culture, and Values
1. Draw the Owländ Other Company Values You Didn’t
Know You Should Have, Jeff Lawson, as presented in First
Round Essentials, Management.
2. And the Children Shall Lead: Gender Diversity and Per-
formance in Venture Capital, Working Paper 17-103, May
2017, 	Paul A. Gompers, Harvard Business School and
Sophie Q. Wang, Harvard University.
3. Us Too: A Due Diligence Survey and Analysis on the Cur-
rent State of Sexual Harassment In the Investment Man-
agement Industry, February 2018, Conducted by The
Investment Management Due Diligence Association.
4. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-07-29/
sequoia-s-first-woman-partner-is-raising-capital-and-
standards. Accessed 	on 	September 	14, 	2019. 	Investor
respondents included endowments, pensions, insurance
companies, private banks, and funds of funds. The geo-
graphic breakdown of the respondents is as follows: 68 per-
cent US/Canada, 25 percent Europe, and 7 percent Asia/
Australia. This report is based on the results of the survey.
5. Gupta Udayan, Done Deals — Venture Capitalists Tell Their
Stories (HBS Press, 2000).
6. NVCA, Branding and Venture Capital: Research Preview,
July 2013, Survey conducted by DeSantis Breindel.
7. Source: CNN Money, February 6, 2013, accessed January 3,
2014, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PbW-1k3ZOA4.

-- 491 of 546 --

462 	NoTes
8. Ibid.
9. Forbes, “Forbes Q and A with Andreessen Horowitz’s
Secret Agent,” February 2011, accessed on January 3,
2014, http://www.forbes.com/sites/nicoleperlroth/2011/
02/04/forbes-q-and-a-with-andreessen-horowitzs-secret-
agent.
10. Mark Boslet, The New Full Service VC, VCJ, June 2013,
https://www.fenwick.com/FenwickDocuments/VCJ%20
June%202013_cover%20story.pdf.
11. Harry Cendrowski, Private Equity: History, Governance, and
Operations (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008).
Chapter 17: Raising Your First Fund
1. AltAssets, “Investor Profile: Christophe Nicolas, execu-
tive director, Morgan Stanley Alternative Investment Part-
ners,” December 8, 2009, accessed February 20, 2011, www.
altassets.com/private-equity-investor-profiles/article/
nz17499.html.
2. Thomas Meyer and Pierre-Yves Mathonet, Beyond the
J Curve: Managing a Portfolio of Venture Capital and Private
Equity Funds (West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons, 2005).
3. AltAssets, “Institutional Investor Profile: Peter Keehn,
Head of Alternative Investments, Allstate Investments,
LLC,” June 29, 2006, accessed February 20, 2011, www.
altassets.com/private-equity-features/by-author-name/
article/nz8835.html.
Chapter 18: The Fundraising Roadshow
1. Thomas Doyal in discussions with the author, January 2011.
2. Source: Luisa Beltran, peHub reporting from Venture
Alpha East PartnerConnect panel, “Roadshow Workshop:
Dos and Don’ts Advice from Top LPs,” April 2013.
3. Ibid.
4. Source: Preqin 2018 survey of all PE funds, https://www.
preqin.com/insights/blogs/placement-agent-success-
in-2018/22795 accessed on September 29, 2019.

-- 492 of 546 --

NoTes 	463
5. “What to Expect from a Placement Agent: Things You Should
Know,” Probitas Partners, accessed January 19, 2011, http://
probitaspartners.com/pdfs/whattoexpect_deponte.pdf.
6. Source: “What to Expect from a Placement Agent: Things
You Should Know,” Probitas Partners, as quoted in The
Definitive Guide to PE Fundraising, PE Media.
7. Robert Finkel and David Greising, The Masters of Private
Equity and Venture Capital (New York: McGraw-Hill,
2009), 216.
8. Source: C. Richard Kramlich, “Venture Capital Greats: A
Conversation with C. Richard Kramlich,” interviewed by
Mauree Jane Perry on August 31, 2006, in San Francisco,
National Venture Capital Association, Arlington, Virginia.
9. Source: William H. Draper, III, “Early Bay Area Venture
Capitalists: Shaping the Economic and Business Land-
scape,” oral history conducted by Sally Smith Hughes in
2009, Regional Oral History Office, The Bancroft Library,
University of California, Berkeley, 2008, p. 31.
Chapter 19: Why LPs seek First-Time Funds
1. Robert Finkel and David Greising, The Masters of Pri-
vate Equity and Venture Capital (New York: McGraw-Hill,
2009), 210.
2. Steven Lazarus, From IP to IPO, Key Issues in Commer-
cializing University Technology, in “The VC View,” sup-
plement, Intellectual Asset Management Magazine, March
2005, accessed March 12, 2011, www.archventure.com/
archview.html.
3. Grove Street Advisors, “Case Study 1,” May 10, 2001,
accessed February 20, 2011, www.grovestreetadvisors.
com/news/gsa_case_study_01.pdf.
4. Kelvin Liu, “The Growing Importance of New and Emerg-
ing Managers in Private Equity,” accessed February 20, 2011,
www.institutional.invesco.com/portal/. . ./II-IPCEM-IVP-
1-E%5B1%5D.pdf.

-- 493 of 546 --

464 	NoTes
5. Ann Grimes, “New Kids Arrive On the Venture-Capital
Block,” Wall Street Journal, February 25, 2005, accessed
February 	20, 	2011, 	http://online.wsj.com/article/0,
SB110928737299763683,00.html.
6. John Coelho, speaking at Venture Alpha West, October
2013 conference.
7. John Coelho, speaking at Venture Alpha West, October
2013 conference.
8. Amit Tiwari, speaking at Venture Alpha West, October
2013 conference.
9. Jean-Pierre Pipaud, “Emerging Managers: Elizabeth Flis-
ser, Capital Z Asset Management,” Emerging Managers
Incubation (blog), September 22, 2008, http://emerging-
managers.blogspot.com/2008/09/emerging-managers-
elizabeth-flisser.html.
10. “CalSTRS AND CalPERS Unveil Emerging Managers and
Financial Services Database,” January 17, 2007, accessed
February 20, 2011, www.calstrs.com/newsroom/2007/
news011707.aspx.
11. Ibid.
12. Women in Investments, Alternative Investment Manage-
ment Program (CalPERS) presentation, February 10, 2009,
www.calpers.ca.gov/eip-docs/. . ./womens. . ./wiic-private-
equity.pdf.
13. Kenneth Smith, speaking at Venture Alpha West, October
2013 conference.
14. Sara Behunek and Mary Kathleen Flynn, “Closing the VC
Gender Gap,” The Deal, July 2, 2010, accessed February 20,
2011, www.thedeal.com/newsweekly/dealmakers/weekly-
movers-and-shakers/closing-the-vc-gender-gap.php.
Chapter 20: sourcing Investment opportunities
1. Erik Lundberg, CIO (University of Michigan Endowment),
in discussions with the author, December 2010.
2. https://www.wsj.com/articles/signalfire-raises-330-mil-
lion-for-data-centric-venture-capital-1494415804 accessed
on September 2, 2019.

-- 494 of 546 --

NoTes 	465
3. The Information https://www.theinformation.com/articles/
in-ambitious-gamble-hedge-fund-coatue-launches-700-
million-early-stage-venture-fund accessed on September 2,
2019.
4. Claire Cain Miller, “Google Ventures Stresses Science of
Deal, Not Art of the Deal,” The New York Times, June 23, 2013.
5. Paul A. Gompers, William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and
Ilya A. Strebulaev. “How Do Venture Capitalists Make
Decisions?” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22587, Sep-
tember 2016.
6. From the documentary, Something Ventured, 2011, produced
by Paul Holland.
7. David Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect: The Inside Story of the
Company That Is Connecting the World (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 2010), 116–121. In recreating this section, I have
relied extensively on this book.
8. James R. Swartz, interview by Mauree Jane Perry, “National
Venture Capital Association Venture Capital Oral History
Project,” 2006, accessed January 30, 2011, http://digita-
lassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/text/swartz_james_
donated.pdf.
9. The Startup of You: Adapt to the Future, Invest in Yourself,
and Transform Your Career, Reid Hoffman and Ben Casno-
cha (New York: Crown Business, 2012), 122. (See Kevin’s
video 	of 	the 	product 	at 	http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=3BP5ax1qs5o.)
10. Randall E. Stross, eBoys: The First Inside Account of Ven-
ture Capitalists at Work (New York: Crown Business,
2000), 216, 291.
11. Michael Moritz, Return to the Little Kingdom: Steve Jobs, The
Creation of Apple and How It Changed the World (New York:
Overlook Press, 2009), 237.
12. William Elkus (Clearstone Partners) in discussions with
the author, September 2008.
13. Chris Douvos in discussion with the author, December 2010.
14. Christopher Rizik (Renaissance Venture Capital Fund) in
discussions with the author, February 2011.

-- 495 of 546 --

466 	NoTes
15. Data from http://www.angelsoft.net, a leading software-
as-a-service tool for managing angel networks.
16. Statistics from www.angelcapitalassociation.org.
17. A well-managed network has a streamlined decision-
making and negotiation process, typically managed by
one angel representative. If each angel is to decide on his
or her own the terms, amounts, and so forth, the process
can be fraught with challenges for both investors and
entrepreneurs.
18. Tony Stanco and Uto Akah, Survey: The Relationship Between
Angels and Venture Capitalists in the Venture Industry (2005).
The survey was sent to 2,156 venture capitalists and angels;
14 percent responded.
19. William R. Kerr, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar, “The
Consequences of Entrepreneurial Finance: A Regression
Discontinuity Analysis” 	(working 	paper 	No. 	10–086,
Harvard Business School Entrepreneurial Management),
March 16, 2010. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1574358.
20. Tony Stanco and Uto Akah, Survey.
21. AUTM 2011 data.
22. Robert Finkel and David Greising, The Masters of Private
Equity and Venture Capital (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009).
23. Damon Darlin, “It Came from Their Lab. But How to
Take It to the Bank?” The New York Times, March 12,
2011.
24. Barry Jaruzelski and Kevin Dehoff, 2010. “THE GLOBAL
INNOVATION 1000: How the Top Innovators Keep Win-
ning, Booz & Company’s Annual Study of the World’s
Biggest R&D Spenders Shows How the Most Innovative
Companies Consistently Outperform Competitors, Even
When Total R&D Investments Fall. Their Secret? They’re
Good at the Right Things, Not at Everything,” Strategy and
Business, (61), p.48.
25. Quoted in Mac Week, March 14, 1989.
26. David Scheer (Scheer and Company) in discussions with the
author, August 2008. “Cholesterol Champions,” accessed

-- 496 of 546 --

NoTes 	467
December 26, 2010, http://pharmexec.findpharma.com/
pharmexec/article/articleDetail.jsp?id=109681.
27. Arthur Rock, interview by Sally Smith Hughes, 2008–2009,
“Early Bay Area Venture Capitalists: Shaping the Eco-
nomic and Business Landscape,” accessed January 30,
2011, 	http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/
text/rock_arthur.pdf.
28. William H. Draper, III, “Early Bay Area Venture Capital-
ists: Shaping the Economic and Business Landscape,” oral
history conducted by Sally Smith Hughes in 2009, Regional
Oral History Office, The Bancroft Library, University of
California, Berkeley, 2008. Accessed on July 3, 2010.
29. John Jarve (Menlo Ventures) in discussion with the author,
September 2008.
30. Doc Searls, “A Talk with Tim O’Reilly,” Linux Journal, Feb-
ruary 1, 2001, accessed February 1, 2011, www.linuxjour-
nal.com/article/4467.
31. “About O’Reilly,” O’Reilly Media, accessed January 28,
2011, http://oreilly.com/about/.
32. Chris Douvos (TIFF) in discussion with the author,
December 2010.
33. Robin Wauters, “Venture Capitalists Get Grilled (and
Pitched at Urinals) at #TCDisrupt,” TechCrunch (blog), May
26, 2010, accessed on December 12, 2010, http://tech-
crunch.com/2010/05/26/venture-capitalists-get-grilled-
and-pitched-at-urinals-at-tcdisrupt.
34. Cromwell Schubarth, “New Menlo VC Venky Ganesan on
Idolizing Warren Buffett and Avoiding ‘The Social Net-
work,’” Business Review, March 5, 2013, accessed on October
6, 2013, http://businessreview.org/new-menlo-vc-venky-
ganesan-on-idolizing-warren-buffett-and-avoiding-the-
social-network.
35. Source: Josh Koppelman at Upround Conference, San Fran-
cisco http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CaX_2n9iAxI.
36. Bessemer Venture Partners, “Anti-Portfolio,” web page,
accessed February 1, 2011, www.bvp.com/Portfolio/Anti-
Portfolio.aspx.

-- 497 of 546 --

468 	NoTes
37. OVP Venure Partners, “Deals Missed,” web page, accessed
January 6, 2014, http://www.ovp.com/deals-missed.
38. Scott Duke Harris, “The Venture Deals That Got Away,”
Mercury News, August 10, 2008, accessed February 1, 2011,
www.mercurynews.com/ci_10156479?nclick_check=1.
39. Alice Schroeder, The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Busi-
ness of Life (New York: Bantam Dell, 2008), 320.
40. Peter O. Crisp, interview by Carole Kolker, October 21,
2008, “Venture Capital Greats: A Conversation with Peter
O. Crisp,” accessed February 1, 2011, http://digitalassets.
lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/text/vcg-crisp.pdf.
41. Robert Finkel and David Greising, The Masters of Private
Equity and Venture Capital, 215.
42. A virtualization software company formed in 1998, now
a publicly traded company in 2019, had over $8 billion in
revenues and $60 billion market capitalization.
43. David Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect: The Inside Story of the
Company That Is Connecting the World (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 2010), 120–122.
44. Scott Austin, “Kleiner Perkins Invested in Facebook at $52
Billion Valuation,” Wall Street Journal, February 14, 2011,
accessed April 2, 2011, http://blogs.wsj.com/venturecapi-
tal/2011/02/14/kleiner-perkins-invests-in-facebook-at-
52-billion-valuation.
45. Keynote Speech, Michigan Growth Capital Symposium,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 2007. The full video
can be found at iTunes: “Michigan Growth Capital Sym-
posium 2007 Keynote Speaker — Ram Shriram, Founder
Sherpalo Ventures.”
46. TechCrunch 	TV, 	Nolan 	Bushnell’s 	New 	Book, 	Find-
ing the Next Steve Jobs,” http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=dWpu62yEpTI, accessed on January 2, 2014.
47. From the documentary, Something Ventured, 2011, pro-
duced by Paul Holland, Foundation Capital, and Molly
Davis, Rainmaker Communications.

-- 498 of 546 --

NoTes 	469
48. Charles D. Ellis, The Partnership: The Making of Goldman
Sachs (New York: Penguin, 2008), 188.
Chapter 21: Due Diligence Cheat sheet
1. Tarang and Sheetal Shah, Venture Capitalists at Work: How
VCs Identify and Build Billion-Dollar Successes (New York:
APress, 2011).
Chapter 22: Diligence
1. Peter Bevelin, Seeking Wisdom: From Darwin to Munger (San
Marino, CA: PCA Publications, 2007), 220. Buffett men-
tioned these criteria at a press conference in 2001.
2. Warren Buffett, The Essays of Warren Buffett: Lessons for
Corporate America, ed. Lawrence A. Cunningham, 2nd ed.
(New York: L. Cunningham, 2008). Buffett defines “under-
standing a business” as “we have a reasonable probability
of being able to assess where it will be in 10 years.”
3. Blake Masters, notes from Stanford class, Startup:CS183,
as recorded by Blake Masters in Spring 2012, http://
blakemasters.com/post/20955341708/peter-thiels-cs183-
startup-class-3-notes-essay.
4. Nassim Nicholas Taleb, The Bed of Procrustes: Philosophi-
cal and Practical Aphorisms (New York: Random House,
2010), 78.
5. Linda Werfelmen — Bad Habits, November 17, 2016. https://
flightsafety.org/asw-article/bad-habits/ accessed on August
2019. Study conducted by National Business Aviation
Association (NBAA) analysis of 143,756 business aviation
flights conducted in 379 business aircraft during the three-
year period 2013–2015.
Chapter 23: Management Team Diligence: Assessing the
Intangible
1. Jim Rasmussen, “Billionaire Talks Strategy with Students,”
Omaha World-Herald, January 2, 1994, 178.
2. PBS, “William Shockley,” accessed April 12, 2011, www.
pbs.org/transistor/album1/shockley/shockley3.html.

-- 499 of 546 --

470 	NoTes
3. Joel N. Shurkin, Broken Genius: The Rise and Fall of William
Shockley, Creator of the Electronic Age (New York: Macmil-
lan, 2008), 181.
4. Ibid., 251.
5. Joel Shurkin, www.pbs.org/transistor/album1/addlbios/
shurkin.html, accessed February 6, 2011.
6. Arthur Rock, interview by Sally Smith Hughes, 2008–2009,
“Early Bay Area Venture Capitalists: Shaping the Economic
and Business Landscape,” accessed February 6, 2011,
http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/text/
rock_arthur.pdf.
7. Source: Ben Horowitz, “How Andreessen Horowitz Eval-
uates CEOs,” Ben’s Blog (blog), May 10, 2010, accessed
February 	6, 	2011, 	http://bhorowitz.com/2010/05/30/
how-andreessen-horowitz-evaluates-ceos/.
8. Geoff Smart and Randy Street, Who: The A Method for Hir-
ing (New York: Ballantine Books, 2008), 160.
9. Geoff Smart (ghSMART), in discussion with the author,
December 2010.
10. Smart and Street, Who: The A Method for Hiring, 161–162.
11. Ibid., 162.
12. Steven 	N. 	Kaplan, 	Mark 	M. 	Kiebanov, 	and 	Morten
Sorensen, “Which CEO Characteristics and Abilities Mat-
ter?” (working paper no. 14195, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research) 2008, accessed February 7, 2011, www.
nber.org/papers/w14195.pdf.
13. Peter F. Drucker, The Effective Executive (New York: Harper-
Collins, 2002), 1.
14. Paul A. Gompers, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David
Scharfstein, “Skill vs. Luck in Entrepreneurship and Ven-
ture Capital: Evidence from Serial Entrepreneurs,” July
2006. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=933932.
15. Alison Wood Brooks, Laura Huang, Sarah Wood Kearney,
and Fiona Murray. “Investors Prefer Entrepreneurial Ven-
tures Pitched by Attractive Men.” Proceedings of the National

-- 500 of 546 --

NoTes 	471
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111 (10)
(March 11, 2014).
16. Alex Pentland, “Defend Your Research: We Can Meas-
ure the Power of Charisma,” Harvard Business Review,
January–February 2010, accessed February 7, 2011, http://
hbr.org/2010/01/defend-your-research-we-can-measure-
the-power-of-charisma/ar/1.
17. Ibid.
18. Patricia Sabatini, “Fibs on Resumes Commonplace,” Pitts-
burgh Post-Gazette, February 24, 2006.
19. Tom Perkins, Valley Boy: The Education of Tom Perkins
(New York: Gotham Books, 2007), 137–138.
20. Interview with Theresa Mack, CPA, CFF, CAMS, CFCI, PI
of Cendrowski Corporate Advisors in Chicago, Illinois,
and Bloomfield Hills, Michigan.
21. Smith 	& 	Wesson 	Chief 	Quits 	Over 	Crime.” 	CNN
Money.com. 	February 	27, 	2004, 	http://money.cnn.
com/2004/02/27/news/smith_wesson/.
22. Geoffrey H. Smart, “The Art and Science of Human Capital
Valuation,” 1998, accessed February 6, 2011, www.ghsmart.
com/media/press/human_capital.pdf.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid.
25. Source: Geoff Smart, “The Art and Science of Human
Capital Valuation,” 1998, accessed February 6, 2011, www.
ghsmart.com/media/press/human_capital.pdf.
26. As one VC told me, “It’s mostly a feel-good thing. I have
yet to find a coach who will honestly state the shortcom-
ings of their own process. They all seem very happy to take
my $15,000 and offer a half a day of subjective analysis. I
only get to see if this really works after several years.”
27. The Myers & Briggs Foundation, “The 16 MBTI® Types:
ESTJ,” 	accessed 	April 	12, 	2011, 	www.myersbriggs.
org/my-mbti-personality-type/mbti-basics/the-16-
mbti-types.asp.

-- 501 of 546 --

472 	NoTes
28. Kaplan, Kiebanov, and Sorensen, “Which CEO Character-
istics and Abilities Matter?”
29. Steven N. Kaplan, “Bet on the Horse: Determining Success
Factors of New Businesses,” Capital Ideas, accessed February
6, 2011, www.chicagobooth.edu/capideas/dec05/1.aspx.
30. Speaking at Stanford Business School, October 2011,
accessed on January 2, 2014, http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=nKN-abRJMEw#t=368.
31. Tarang and Sheetal Shah, Venture Capitalists at Work (New
York: APress, 2011).
32. Scott Shane, Born Entrepreneurs, Born Leaders – How Genes
Affect your Work Life (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2010).
Chapter 24: Market, Product, and Business Model Analysis
1. Tarang and Sheetal Shah, Venture Capitalists at Work: How
VCs Identify and Build Billion-Dollar Successes (New York:
Apress, 2011).
2. Speaking at VentureAlpha East, April 2013, Boston, MA.
Trust me, I was in the audience.
3. Tarang and Sheetal Shah.
4. Todd Dagres (Spark Capital) in discussions and e-mail
communications with the author, 2008 and 2011.
5. Tim Ferris, Tribe of Mentors: Short Life Advice from the Best in
the World (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2017).
6. Terry McGuire (Polaris Ventures) in discussions with the
author, January 2011.
7. Saras D. Sarasvathy, “What Makes Entrepreneurs Entre-
preneurial?” Accessed February 6, 2011, available at www.
effectuation.org/sites/default/files/research_papers/
what-makes-entrepreneurs-entrepreneurial-saras-
vathy_0.pdf.
8. Antoine de Saint Exupéry, Flight to Arras, trans. Lewis Gal-
antiére (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1942), 129.
9. http://davidgcohen.com/2013/03/07/vc-asshat-
move-1/ Accessed on September 2, 2019.

-- 502 of 546 --

NoTes 	473
10. “Inside the Mind of Google,” 2010, CNBC Interview with
Maria Bartiromo.
11. Modified from Douglas Macmillan, “Andreessen: Bubble
Believers ‘Don’t Know What They’re Talking About’—
Venture Capitalist Discusses the Current State of Tech
Investing,” Wall Street Journal, January 3, 2014.
12. Arthur 	Rock, 	interview 	by 	Sally 	Smith 	Hughes,
http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/text/
rock_arthur.pdf.
13. Nichomachean 	Ethics, 	Book 	I, 	passage 	3, 	accessed
February 9, 2011, http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/nico-
machaen.mb.txt.
Chapter 26: structure of the Term sheet
1. Mark Suster, “Is Convertible Debt Preferable to Equity?”
Both Sides of the Table (blog), August 30, 2010, http://www.
bothsidesofthetable.com/2010/08/30/is-convertible-
debt-preferable-to-equity.
2. Source: David Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2010), p. 89.
3. Source: Based on Series Seed, developed by Fenwick &
West, LLP, www.seriesseed.com.
4. See 	“Emerging 	Companies,” 	Wilson 	Sonsini, 	www.
wsgr.com/wsgr/display.aspx?sectionname=practice/
termsheet.htm.
Chapter 27: Buy Low, sell High
1. Steven N. Kaplan and Per Stromberg, “Financial Contract-
ing Theory Meets the Real World: An Empirical Analysis
of Venture Capital Contracts” (CRSP working paper 513),
April 26, 2000, accessed February 11, 2011, http://ssrn.
com/abstract=218175.
2. David Kirkpatrick, The Facebook Effect: The Inside Story of the
Company That Is Connecting the World (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 2010).
3. Josh Koppelman, speaking at Upround Conference, San
Francisco, 2013.

-- 503 of 546 --

474 	NoTes
4. Aswath 	Damodaran, 	“Valuing 	Young, 	Start-Up 	and
Growth Companies: Estimation Issues and Valuation
Challenges,” June 12, 2009, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.
com/abstract=1418687.
5. Source: Arthur Rock, interview by Sally Smith Hughes,
2008–2009, “Early Bay Area Venture Capitalists: Shaping
the Economic and Business Landscape,” accessed Febru-
ary 10, 2011, http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/
ucb/text/rock_arthur.pdf.
6. Amy E. Knaup, “Survival and Longevity in the Business
Employment Dynamics Data,” Monthly Labor Review (May
2005), 50–56; Amy E. Knaup and M. C. Piazza, “Business
Employment Dynamics Data: Survival and Longevity,”
Monthly Labor Review (September 2007), 3–10.
7. Aswath 	Damodaran, 	“Valuing 	Young, 	Start-Up 	and
Growth Companies.”
8. Mark Suster, “Want to Know How VC’s Calculate
Valuation?”
9. Brad Feld’s blog, Feld Thoughts blogs.
10. Jonathan D. Gworek, “The Making of a Winning Term
Sheet: 	Understanding 	What 	Founders 	Want,” 	Morse
Barnes-Brown 	Pendleton 	PC, 	June 	2007, 	accessed
February 9, 2011, www.mbbp.com/resources/business/
founder_termsheet.html.
11. Colin Blaydon and Fred Wainwright, “It’s Time to Do Away
with Participating Preferred,” Venture Capital Journal, July
2006, accessed February 11, 2011, http://mba.tuck.dart-
mouth.edu/pecenter/research/VCJ_July_2006.pdf.
12. Rick Heitzmann, First Mark Capital, in discussions with
the author.
13. Frank Demmler, “Practical Implications of Anti-Dilution
Protection,” accessed February 10, 2011, www.andrew.
cmu.edu/user/fd0n/54%20Practical%20Implications%20
Anti-dilution%20excel.htm.

-- 504 of 546 --

NoTes 	475
14. Based on a survey conducted by law firm, Wilmer Hale
and Fenwick & West.
15. Snapchat Founders’ Grip Tightened After a Spat with an
Early Investor by Katie Benner, The New York Times, dated
February 23, 2017, https://nyti.ms/2lB5TnG Accessed on
March 2, 2017
16. https://www.cnbc.com/2017/03/02/snap-ipo-huge-
exits-for-lightspeed-benchmark.html Accessed on Septem-
ber 14, 2019.
17. Justin J. Camp, Venture Capital Due Diligence: A Guide to
Making Smart Investment Choices and Increasing Your Portfo-
lio Returns (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2002), 140.
18. While this may seem unimportant, I am aware of at least
one situation where the founder of a venture-backed
company died in a car accident. In another situation, the
founder had an ugly divorce case that caused undue dis-
traction to the board, shareholders, and the company while
his ownership in the company was being divvied up.
19. Paul A. Gompers, William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and
Ilya A. Strebulaev. “How Do Venture Capitalists Make
Decisions?” NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22587,
September 2016.
20. Ibid.
21. Ibid
22. Tom Perkins, Valley Boy: The Education of Tom Perkins (New
York: Gotham Books, 2007), 112.
23. Ibid.
Chapter 29: serving on Boards
1. https://venturebeat.com/2013/09/11/vinod-khosla-vcs-
should-hush-up-because-they-havent-done-sht/ Accessed
on Aug 23, 2019.
2. William D. Bygrave and Jeffry A. Timmons, Venture Capital
at the Crossroads (Watertown, MA: Harvard Business Press,
1992), 220.

-- 505 of 546 --

476 	NoTes
3. Ibid.
4. Brad Feld (Foundry Group) in discussions with the author,
December 2010.
Chapter 30: Board Culture and orientation
1. Allison Leopold Tilley, “Best Practices for the High Perfor-
mance Board,” podcast, accessed January 30, 2011.
2. Ibid.
3. Dennis T. Jaffe and Paul N. Levensohn, “After the Term
Sheet: How Venture Boards Influence the Success or Failure
of Technology Companies,” November 2003, accessed Jan-
uary 30, 2011, www.equitynet.com/media/pdf/How%20
Venture%20Boards%20Influence%20The%20Success%20
or%20Failure%20of%20Technology%20Companies%20
(Dennis%20Jaffe,%20et%20al,%202003).pdf.
4. Pascal N. Levensohn, “Rites of Passage: Managing CEO
Transition in Venture-Backed Technology Companies,”
January 2006, accessed January 30, 2011, www.levp.com/
news/whitepapers.shtml.
5. Ibid.
6. Working Group on Director Accountability and Board
Effectiveness, “A Simple Guide to the Basic Responsi-
bilities 	of 	VC-Backed 	Company 	Directors,” 	accessed
January 31, 2011, www.nvca.org/index.php?option=com_
docman&task=doc_download&gid=78&Itemid=93.
7. Brad Feld (Foundry Group) in discussions with the author,
December 2010.
8. Brian J. Broughman, “The Role of Independent Directors
in VC-Backed Firms,” October 13, 2008, available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1162372.
9. Steven N. Kaplan and Per Johan Strömberg, “Financial
Contracting Theory Meets the Real World: An Empirical
Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts,” March 2000 (CRSP
working paper No. 513), available at SSRN: http://ssrn.
com/abstract=218175 or doi:10.2139/ssrn.218175.
10. Ibid.

-- 506 of 546 --

NoTes 	477
Chapter 31: Let Me Know How I Can Be Helpful: Value
Creation
1. Lip-Bu Tan (Walden International) in discussions with the
author, December 2008.
2. PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Paths to Value,” 2002. The
Paths to Value study analyzed more than 350 R&D and
services-intensive companies in the United States, Europe,
and Israel that received seed or first-round private financ-
ing between 1999 and 2001.
3. McKinsey & Company, The State of the Corporate Board,
2007: A McKinsey Global Survey, accessed January 30,
2011, www.mckinseyquarterly.com/The_state_of_the_cor-
porate_board_2007_A_McKinsey_Global_Survey_2011.
A total of 2,268 respondents, including 825 directors and
officers, contributed to this survey.
4. Fred Dotzler, “What Do Venture Capitalists Really Do,
and Where Do They Learn to Do It?” De Novo Ventures,
accessed 	January 	30, 	2011, 	www.denovovc.com/arti-
cles/2001_Dotzler.pdf.
5. NVCA, Branding and Venture Capital: Research Preview,
July 2013, survey conducted by DeSantis Breindel.http://
nvcatoday.nvca.org/index.php/nvca-study-explores-the-
importance-of-brand-management-in-the-venture-capital-
industry.html Accessed on April 8, 2014.
6. Akamai went on to become a global Internet/web com-
pany and celebrated its IPO in two years from launch.
Chapter 32: Challenges in the Boardroom
1. Arthur Rock, interview by Sally Smith Hughes, 2008–2009,
“Early Bay Area Venture Capitalists: Shaping the Eco-
nomic and Business Landscape,” accessed January 30, 2011,
http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/text/rock_
arthur.pdf.
2. From the documentary, Something Ventured, 2011, produced
by Paul Holland.
3. Ibid.

-- 507 of 546 --

478 	NoTes
4. Harvard Business Review, February 2008.
5. James R. Swartz, interview by Mauree Jane Perry, 2006,
“National Venture Capital Association Venture Capi-
tal Oral History Project,” accessed January 30, 2011,
http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/roho/ucb/text/
rock_arthur.pdf.
6. Carey, Pete, “A start-up’s true tale: Often-told story of Cis-
co’s launch leaves out the drama, intrigue,” Mercury News,
December 1, 2001.
7. John Kenneth Galbraith, The New Industrial State (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1971).
8. Thomas Bredt (Menlo Ventures) in discussions with the
author, July 2008.
9. Brian J. Broughman and Jesse M. Fried, “Renegotiation of
Cash Flow Rights in the Sale of VC-Backed Firms,” Jour-
nal of Financial Economics, Vol. 95, pp. 384–399, 2010; UC
Berkeley Public Law Research Paper No. 956243. Available
at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=956243.
10. Robert Finkel and David Greising, The Masters of Pri-
vate Equity and Venture Capital (McGraw-Hill; 1st ed.,
November 2009), 216.
11. “The Greatest Defunct Web Sites and -Dotcom Disas-
ters,” CNET. June 5, 2008. Archived from the original
on 2008-06-07. Accessed March 21, 2011, http://web.
archive.org/web/20080607211840/http://crave.cnet.
co.uk/0,39029477,49296926-6,00.htm.
12. Constance Loizos, “Could It Happen to You?” Venture Cap-
ital Journal, November 1, 2008, accessed January 30, 2011,
www.jphibbard.com/uploads/VCJ%2011-01-08.pdf.
13. Kristi Heim, “Entellium CEO Pleads Guilty to Wire Fraud,”
Seattle Times, December 12, 2008, accessed January 30, 2011,
http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/businesstech-
nology/2008499215_entellium120.html.
14. Ibid.

-- 508 of 546 --

NoTes 	479
15. Xuan Tian, Gregory F. Udell, and Xiaoyun Yu, “Disciplin-
ing Delegated Monitors: Evidence from Venture Capital,”
January 23, 2011. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1746461.
16.. McKinsey Quarterly, February 2008 Survey on Governance.
Of the 586 respondents, 378 were privately held compa-
nies, making it a relevant sample for the purposes of our
discussion.
17. William D. Bygrave and Jeffry A. Timmons, Venture Capital
at the Crossroads (Harvard Business Press, 1992), 220.
18. Working Group on Director Accountability and Board
Effectiveness, “A Simple Guide to the Basic Responsibilities
of VC-Backed Company Directors,” October 2007, www.
nvca.org/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_
download&gid=78&Itemid=93.
Chapter 33: exit strategies
1. How Do Venture Capitalists Make Decisions? by Paul
Gompers, William Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, Ilya A. Streb-
ulaev, NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
(NBER) Working Paper No. 22587, Issued in September
2016, Survey 885 institutional venture capitalists (VCs) at
681 firms.
2. David Mayer and Martin F. Kenney, professor, Depart-
ment of Human and Community Development, Univer-
sity of California, Davis, “Economic Action does not take
place in a Vacuum: Understanding Cisco’s Acquisition and
Development Strategy,” BRIE working paper 148, Sep-
tember 2002.
3. Glenn Rifkin, “Growth by Acquisition,” The Case of
Cisco Systems," Strategy and Business (Booz Allen Hamilton,
1997) 	http://www.strategy-business.com/article/15617?
gko=3ec0c accessed on December 13, 2010.
4. Tony Hsieh (CEO, Zappos), Delivering Happiness: A Path
to Profits, Passion, and Purpose (New York: Hachette Book

-- 509 of 546 --

480 	NoTes
Group, 2010), 209–211. Tony tried to buy Sequoia’s stock
for $200 million, but eventually Zappos was sold to Ama-
zon for $1.2 billion.
5. Paul Stavrand, “Best Practice Guide for Angel Groups—
Post Investment Monitoring,” accessed January 30, 2011,
www.angelcapitalassociation.org/data/Documents/
Resources/AngelCapitalEducation/ACEF_BEST_PRAC-
TICES_Post_Investment.pdf.
6. Working Group on Director Accountability and Board
Effectiveness, “A Simple Guide to the Basic Respon-
sibilities 	of 	VC-Backed 	Company 	Directors,” 	www.
nvca.org/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_
download&gid=78&Itemid=93.
7. Tim Ferris, Tribe of Mentors: Short Life Advice from the
Best in the World (New York: Houghton Mifflin Har-
court, 2017).
Chapter 34: Acquisitions
1. David Mayer and Martin F. Kenney, "Economic Action
Does Not Take Place in a Vacuum," BRIE Working paper
148, September 2002.
2. Ibid., attributed to Michael Volpi, chief strategic officer.
3. Source: Brad Stone, “The Secrets of Bezos,” Bloomberg
Businessweek, October 2013.
4. Between 2002 and 2009.
5. Marc Goedhart, Tim Koller, and David Wessels, "The Five
Types of Successful Acquisitions," McKinsey Quarterly, July
2010, accessed February 10, 2011, www.mckinseyquarterly.
com/The_five_types_of_successful_acquisitions_2635.
6. Between 1993 and 2001.
7. David Mayer and Martin F. Kenney, “Economic Action
Does Not Take Place in a Vacuum.”
8. Between 2001 and 2013.
9. Amir Efrati, “Google Cranks Up M&A Machine,” Wall
Street Journal, March 5, 2011.

-- 510 of 546 --

NoTes 	481
10. Source: 	www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1994.html,
accessed March 5, 2011.
11. www.wired.com/epicenter/2010/04/apple-kills-lala-
music-service/ Accessed February 21, 2011.
12. Karen Ho, Liquidated — An Ethnography of Wall Street (Dur-
ham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009), 106.
13. Source: Adapted from Tony Hsieh, Delivering Happiness:
A Path to Profits, Passion, and Purpose (New York: Hachette
Book Group, 2010), 45–46.
Chapter 35: Initial Public offering
1. Center for Private Equity and Entrepreneurship, Tuck
School of Business at Dartmouth, “Results of Survey of Pri-
vate Equity Funds,” April 2005, accessed February 11, 2011,
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pecenter/research/
pdfs/exits_survey.pdf.
2. KPMG, 	LLP, 	“Going 	Public,” 	accessed 	February 	11,
2011, 	www.kpmg.com/Ca/en/IssuesAndInsights/Arti-
clesPublications/Documents/Going%20Public.pdf; Ernst
& Young, Ernst & Young’s Guide to Going Public: Lessons from
the Leaders, accessed February 11, 2011, www.ey.com/Pub-
lication/vwLUAssets/Lessons_from_the_leaders/$FILE/
BE0067.pdf.
3. Ernst & Young, Ernst & Young’s Guide to Going Public.
4. Ibid.
5. Initial Public Offerings: 1980–2010 Tables Updated Through
2010, as of January 2011. Jay R. Ritter, Cordell Professor of
Finance, University of Florida.
6. This was announced on April 29, 2004.
7. Eric Schmidt, “Google’s CEO on the Enduring Lessons of a
Quirky IPO,” Harvard Business Review, May 2010.
8. www.investopedia.com/terms/b/bookrunner.asp,
accessed February 21, 2011.
9. From the documentary, Something Ventured, 2011. Produced
by Paul Holland.

-- 511 of 546 --

482 	NoTes
10. Ernst & Young, Ernst & Young’s Guide to Going Public,
www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Lessons_from_
the_leaders/$FILE/BE0067.pdf.
11. Roman Binder, Patrick Steiner, and Jonathan Woetzel,
“A New Way to Measure IPO Success,” McKinsey Quar-
terly, January 2002, accessed February 11, 2011, http://
mkqpreview1.qdweb.net/A_new_way_to_measure_IPO_
success_1538.
12. KPMG, LLP, Going Public.
13. Ibid., Ernst & Young, Ernst & Young’s Guide to Going Public.
14. Paul A. Gompers, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David
Scharfstein, “Venture Capital Investment Cycles: The
Impact of Public Markets” (May 2005). NBER Working
Paper Series, Vol. w11385, 2005. Available at SSRN: http://
ssrn.com/abstract=731040.
15. www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/dotcon/
thinking/primer.html, accessed February 22, 2011.
16. Steven Davidoff, “Why I.P.O.s Get Underpriced,” New York
Times, May 2011.
17. Ibid.
18. Ibid.
19. Eric Schmidt, “Google’s CEO on the Enduring Lessons of a
Quirky IPO.”
20. Ibid.
21. Lip-Bu Tan (Walden International) in discussion with the
author, August 2008.
22. Seth Rudnick (Canaan Partners) in discussion with the
author, August 2008.
23. Brad Feld (The Foundry Group) in discussion with the
author, December 2010.
Chapter 36: secondary sales
1. Benjamin F. Kuo, “Interview with Greg Brogger, Shares-
Post,” Socaltech, June 17, 2009, accessed February 11, 2011,

-- 512 of 546 --

NoTes 	483
http://www.socaltech.com/interview_with_greg_brog-
ger_sharespost/s-0022276.html.
2. Pui-Wing Tam and Geoffrey Fowler, “Hot Trade in Pri-
vate Shares of Facebook,” Wall Street Journal, December 28,
2010, https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB100014240529702
04685004576045943100180026.
3. Yuliya 	Chernova, 	“Trading 	Pre-IPO 	Shares 	Gets
Trickier — Investors Wanting to Get in Early on the
next Twitter Find a Tougher Path,” Wall Street Journal.
October 29, 2013.

-- 513 of 546 --



-- 514 of 546 --

485
Index
3Com, venture backing, 100
5AM Ventures (investment), 242
.406 Ventures, 168
A
Academic technology transfer,
impact (AUTM
research), 241–242
Accelerators, 238, 239
Accel Partners, 53, 182,
234–235, 394
Facebook stake sale, 450
investment, 318
management team
assessment, 285
Top Tier Capital Partners
involvement, 92
Accountability, increase, 374
Accounting, back office
offering, 189
Acquisitions, 417. See also Merg-
ers and acquisitions
acquisition-related dis-
cussions, 418
drivers, 423–424
mean deal values, 422e
motivators, 424–426
occurrence, 432
strategic viewpoint, 419
Action, bias, 20
Active engagement, cultural
composition element, 369
Adams Street Partners, fund-
raising, 90
AdSense, 423
Advanced Cardiovascular
Systems (ACS), NEA
investment, 36
Affirmative covenants, 353
Ahoy Capital, 218
Ahrens, Brent, 237
Ahrens, Jack, 38, 238, 333, 350
Ajao, Adeyemi, 109
Akamai, 247
Alibaba, Softbank
investment, 3–4
Allen & Company, 183
AllRaise, women collaboration
(encouragement), 180
Allstate Investments, 201
Alternative assets, 73
illiquidity, 73–74
Alternative investment manage-
ment (AIM) program
(CalPERS), 228
Alternative investments, 75e
Ambiguity, comfort (investor
characteristic), 47
Ambiq Micro, 247
Amity Ventures, launch, 115–116

-- 515 of 546 --

486 	Index
Analysis (VC responsibility), 24
Analyst position, posting, 22
Anchor investor,
securing, 214–215
Andreessen Horowitz, 12,
26, 61, 229
business model
description, 301
change, 183
firm archetype, 173
Top Tier Capital Partners
involvement, 92
Andreessen, Marc, 12, 249
services standard, 183
VC industry perspective, 59
worldview, 414
Andrews, Whit, 398
Angel investment terms, stand-
ardization, 241
Angel investors, convertible loan
usage, 309–310
AngelList, 236
Angel networks, 238, 240–241
Angels
contacts, 240–241
sector expertise, limitation, 240
Annual budgets, usage, 341
Antidilution, 313
economic terms, 336e
preferences, 317
protections, 333–340
provisions
categories, 334
impact, 335e
weighted average antidilution,
usage, 335
Antifragile (Taleb), 13
Apple
investment opportunity,
250–251
venture backing, 99
Applied Materials, 84
Applied Semantics, acquisition, 423
Apprenticeship (Kauffman
Fellows Program), 33
Arboretum Ventures, 37, 38
Arboretum Ventures I, fund
establishment, 134
ARCH Venture Partners, 249
backing, 397–398
launch, 26
lead investor search, 214–215
sourcing opportunities, 242
ARCH Venture Partners Fund I,
raising, 221
Arensberg, Austen, 363
Arete, 174
Ariely, Dan, 55
Armstrong, Brian (decision-
making framework), 54
Arnold, Paul, 106–107
Aspegren, Lindsay, 362, 419
Asset allocation, 73, 81e
Cap Gemini World Wealth
Report, 86
mandate basis, 82e
plan, development, 83
strategy, 87–88
Yale endowment,
example, 77e
Asset classes, 74e
types, 73
Asset purchase, stock purchase
(contrast), 432
Assets-under-management
(AUM), 14, 130
scaling, 108
Attention deficit disorder
(ADD), usage, 20
Attribution, challenges, 138
Audits, back office offering, 191
August Capital, 370, 375
Authoritative pit bull (board
member archetype), 369
Automatic conversion price, 318
Axelsen, Daniel, 418

-- 516 of 546 --

Index 	487
B
Babbit (Lewis), 267
Background checks, 281–284
Back office, 7
administration/
operations, 188–191
audit/tax services, 191
investor communication prepa-
ration service, 190–191
offerings, 189–190
valuation service, 190
Backward integration, 423
Balance sheet, changes, 310
Bancroft, Paul, 18
listening ability, character-
istic, 49–50
Base10 Ventures
founding, 114
growth, 115e
values, 176
Batra, Rajeev, 247
interview process, 31
Battery Ventures, 26, 248
Top Tier Capital Partners
involvement, 92
Bay Networks, venture
backing, 100
Bell, Peter, 115
Benchmark, 23, 229
firm archetype, 173
recruitment, 27
selection ability,
importance, 112
Benchmark Capital, 398, 413
due diligence, 259
offer, 237
Benchmarks
establishment, problem, 152
index, performance com-
parison, 97
selection, 149–150
self-selection, 151
universe, 149–150
Berkshire Hathaway,
Buffett replacement
(search), 63
Bernstein, Sanford, 38
Berson, Brett, 185
Bessemer Securities, 18, 49
Bessemer Venture
Partners, 103, 387
anti-portfolio showcase, 249
interviews, 22
pitch sessions, 247
reinvention, 19
Best-suited member,
participation, 187
Beyond the J Curve (Meyer/
Mathonet), 97, 200
Bhasin, Guarav, 429
Bias
avoidance, 50–56
impact, 54, 281
self-selection bias, 150–153
Big Data, rise, 45
Bigger fool theory, 444–445
Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, 78
Bird, Steve (network impor-
tance), 127–128
Blackstone, Carl, 401
Blaydon, Colin, 332
Blind optimism, problem, 54
Blind spots, covering, 401
Blockchain, 45
Board of directors
approval, 340–342
best practices, 380–381
boardroom, challenges, 391
CEO engagement, 378
changes, 342
committees, 369
control, release, 393e
cultural aspects, 370
cultural composition,
elements, 369–370

-- 517 of 546 --

488 	Index
Board of directors (continued)
culture, 367
improvement, 369–376
effectiveness, 384–385
evaluation, 403–404
external/internal
challenges, 362
governance, 363
input, repudiation, 392
management team,
alignment, 412
meetings, effectiveness,
384–385, 386e
members
archetypes, categories,
369–370
attributes, 364e
on-boarding, 368
roles/responsibilities,
362–365
self-assessment, 371
orientation, 367
participation, 187
passive-aggressive board
members, 370
policies, 368–369
primary role, 362–363
role, 394
preparation, 361–362
seats, 313
self-checks, 370
self-evaluation process, 370
service, 357
legal requirements, 359–361
Board seats, negotiation, 7
Boeing Corporation,
checklists, 261
Bonds (fixed-income sources), 73
Bosack, Leonard, 394
Boston Scientific, 37
Botha, Roelef, 180, 414
friends/enemies
perspective, 58
investment quality, 59
recruitment effort, 181
solution, creation, 294
success, 65
Bowes, Jr., William K., 53
Brains (investor characteristic), 48
Brandt, Kristine, 228
Bricks and mortar model, 300
Brin, Sergey, 440–441
Broad-based weighted
average, 334
Brogger, Greg, 450
Bryer, James, 15, 182, 318
Buckets, competition, 89–90
Buffett, Warren, 251, 418
acquisition driver, 423
path, emulation, 41
replacement, search, 63
Burrill Life Sciences, 220
Bushnell, Nolan, 250
Businesses
back office valuation, 190
judgment rule, 361
model
analysis, 293
assessment, 299–302
plan, preparation, 437
pricing power, 300
records, usage, 431
strategy, 378
value driver, 388–389
understanding, 361
Buyouts, 91
Byers, Brook, 26
Bylaws, changes, 342
C
California Pension Retirement
System (CalPERS), 76, 77,
225–226, 228
California State Teachers’
Retirement System
(CalSTRS), 225–266

-- 518 of 546 --

Index 	489
Cambridge Associates, 107
Campbell, Joseph, 21
Camp, Justin, 343
Campus recruitment, 28–31
language/handwriting,
attention, 30
Canaan Partners, 237, 394, 446
Cap Gemini World Wealth
Report, 86
Capital
access, democratization, 65
concentration, 227e
cost, 328
deployment, 130–131
importance. See Human
capital.
needs, patterns, 134
supply-demand drivers, 320
Capital accounting, back office
offering, 189
Capped conversion, impact, 312e
Capped convertible notes, 311
Capped participation
variable, 330
Career interests, conflicts, 374
Carried interest (carry), 6, 8,
159–160
calculation, 160
check, 60
dilution, 188
fund manager allocation, 161
Cash
asset safety, 73
inflows
determination, 84
sources, 75
offering, 432
outflows, determination, 84
Cash and carry, business, 3
Cash flow, 328
cash flow-related matters, 397
forecast, 329
importance, 237
Cash-on-cash (C-on-C), 139–140
fund performance
measure, 141
importance, 321e
measurement, 320
multiples, 1, 172
return, 5
Cendana Capital, investments, 93
Cendrowski, Harry, 189
Center for Private Equity and
Entrepreneurship (Tuck
School of Business at
Dartmouth), 332–333
Certificate of incorporation,
changes, 342
Change
comfort, investor charac-
teristic, 47
triggers, 396e
Checklist Manifesto, The
(Gawande), 262
Checklists. See Due diligence
importance/usage, 265–267
Chen, Chi-Hua, 234
Chief Executive Officer (CEO)
assessment, 363
board member support, 378
challenges, 399–400
changes, 393e
control, surrender, 393e
execution, 275–279
ousters, 396
role, release, 393e
selection, 274, 363
traits, assessment, 275–276
transitions, 392–395
change, triggers, 396e
management, best
practices, 3905
trust, establishment,
371–372
value contributions, 381
VC support, 401

-- 519 of 546 --

490 	Index
Chiniwalla, Punit, 31
Christensen, Clayton, 293
Churn, level, 59
Cisco
acquisitions, 422
due diligence, 411–412
joint initiatives, 419
LP investment, 86
venture backing, 100
Cisco Systems, formation, 394
Clarkson, Elizabeth, 12
Clavier, Jeff, 17
Clawbacks, 161–162
Clean web opportunities, 60
Clearstone Venture Partners, 237
Closing date/conditions, 345
Closing process, 353
Cloud, software (relationship), 45
Coatue Venture, 230
Coelho, John, 223, 224
Cohen, David, 195, 239, 299
Coinbase, 54
Coinvestment rights, nego-
tiation, 166
Cold-calling, 27
Collins, Jim, 276
Colonna, Jerry (Wilson part-
nership), 67
Comfort zone, exit, 19
Communication
ability, 216
cadence, building, 372
cultural composition
element, 368
Companies
actions, 260
board of directors,
investment banker
identification, 427–428
elements (Sequoia Capital
viewpoint), 264
giants, attraction, 272–274
motivation, 418
overview, 376
ownership, determination, 323
performance, 447
public-ready company, identi-
fication, 437–438
Company sale, 426–434
approvals/closing, 433
due diligence, 431–432
investment banker,
hiring, 428–431
investment banking
process, 430–431
market conditions, test, 427–428
prescreening stage, 428
process, formalization, 428–431
transaction, negotiation/struc-
ture, 432–433
Comparable method, 326e
Comparable transactions
(comps), 319
broadness, 326
valuations, 324–327
Competence, circle
(building), 42–43
Competencies (VC responsi-
bility), 24
Competitive advantage,
building, 102
Competitive constraints, 12
Competitive position, 319
Complacency, avoidance, 375
Compound annual growth rate
(CAGR), 329
Confidentiality, 360–361, 430
consideration, 186
LPAC responsibility, 165–166
Conflict of interest (LPAC respon-
sibility), 163–164
Conformity, impact, 55
Contacts, importance, 127–128
Control, 340–342
impact, 341e
Conversion triggers, 311

-- 520 of 546 --

Index 	491
Convertible loan (convertible
note), 309–313, 310e
capped convertible notes, 311
Core values, example, 178
Corporate operating funds,
investments, 86
Corporate records, usage, 431
Corporate research, 243–244
Corporate VC funds (CVCs), 86
Correlation Ventures, 109
Corrigan, Wilfred, 245
Co-sale, 342
agreements, 343
restrictions, 234
Cottrill, Lance, 229
Cowan, David, 26–27,
102–103, 387
reinvention, willingness, 19
VC quality, identification, 39
Creative Artists Agency (CAA),
growth, 184–185
Creative construction, 11–12
Creative destruction, 11
Creativity, networks
(impact), 104
Credibility, harm, 138
Credit Suisse, 169
placement agent
services, 211, 214
Credit Suisse Fund of Funds, 155
Criminal histories, background
checks, 281–283
Crisp, Peter O., 249
Crockett, Catherine, 170
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 176
Culture, 173, 174–186
discussion, 176
mindset, emerging manager
integration, 223–224
Customer acquisition, 387
Customer relationships, value
driver, 387
Cybersecurity, opportunities, 45
D
Dacko, Ted, 412
Dagres, Todd, 247–248
investment reasons, 295
Dahl, Roald, 313–314
Dalio, Ray (principles), 41, 52
Damodaran, Aswath, 319, 328
Dark Side of Valuation, The
(Damodaran), 319
Data
networks, 104–105
venture fund analysis, 142
veracity, 150
Datarobot, 68
Data room
establishment, 431
folders, 206e
Davidoff, Steven, 444
Da Vinci, Leonardo (sales
pitch), 277–278
Deal flow, 237
Debt obligations, 342
Debt, securing, 304, 306
Decisions
impact, 54
timeline, LP selection
criteria, 197
Defensibility, impact, 105
Demand, presence, 293
Demmler, Frank (investment
participation), 334–335
Demo-days, 238
Dennis, Reid, 16, 53
DePonte, Kelly, 120, 162, 210
placement agent role,
analysis, 211–214
Devices for Vascular Interven-
tion, 36–37
DFJ-Cisco business plan compe-
tition, 247
Diffusive valuation,
springing warrants
(effectiveness), 340e

-- 521 of 546 --

492 	Index
Diligence, 259. See also
Due diligence
approaches. See Management
due diligence.
art, 270
ethics, relationship, 299
Dilution, assumptions, 323
Disclosure, 360–361
Discounted cash flow (DCF)
method, 327–329
Discounted cash flow (DCF)
approach, 319
Dishonesty, problem, 55
Distributions to paid-in (DPI)
capital, 140
Distribution waterfall, 133e
Diversity, 179–180
Dividends, 335
economic terms, 336e
Dixon, Chris, 61
Doerr, John, 394
cold-calling, 26
VC training, 38–39
Donohue, Liam, 168, 217
Doppstadt, Eric, 79
motto, 137
track record analysis, 222
Dorm Room Fund, 235
Dorsey, Jack, 235, 248
Dot-com bubble, 45
Double dip, 330
Douvos, Chris, 218, 246
dinner table analogy, 202
limited partner status, 238
Dow Chemical Company, LP
investment, 86
Down-round financings,
occurrence, 320
Doyal, G. Thomas, 207
Drag-along rights, 343
Draper Fisher Jurvetson (DFJ),
26, 250, 289
Draper Gaither Anderson, 217
Draper III, William, 43,
217, 234, 289
LSI Logic investment, 245
Drucker, Peter, 100, 276
innovative opportunity,
sources, 100e–101e
Due diligence, 42, 207,
304, 411–412
approaches, 286e. See also
Management.
cheat sheet, 255
checklist, 261, 262e
importance, 262
company sale due dili-
gence, 431–432
conducting, 166, 240, 349
Socratic method, 266–267
criteria, 98, 256e
LP process, 95
outsourcing, 91
performing, 201
phases, 419
process, 260
questions, 263e
tailoring, 263, 265
Duke, Annie, 42
Dunlieve, Bruce, 237
Dutch auctions, 443–446
middlemen,
elimination, 445–446
Duty of care, 358, 359
Duty of confidentiality, 360
Duty of disclosure, 360
Duty of loyalty, 358, 359–360
E
Eakman, Lindel, 98, 121
fund investment manage-
ment, 193–194
Early-stage investment, staged
financing (usage), 349–350
Early-stage investors
convertible loan usage, 309

-- 522 of 546 --

Index 	493
opportunity prediction, 327
ROFR, 336
valuation, 259–260
Earnings, characteristics, 329
Earnouts, 433
Eason, Alice, 23
eBay, 236, 294
Economic interest, dilution, 188
Edgar, Lisa, 97
portfolio management, 135
return, earning potential, 148
Efrusy, Kevin, 234–235
Ego
absence, 185
impact, 60–61, 357–358
presence, 52, 54
Election procedures,
changes, 342
Elevation Partners, 55
Eli Lilly, 37
Elkus, William, 237
Emerging managers
HNWI search, 225
LP selection criteria, 195
pecking order, 225e
portfolio, fund-of-funds allo-
cation, 227e
ranking, 224–226
Emerging technology, moon
shots, 46–47
Emotions
harm, 54
logic, contrast, 51
Employees
attention, 186
records, usage, 432
Employee stock options, 338
Employment agreements, 344
Employment-related
terms, 344–345
Endowments, 76–79
investment income
generation, 76–77
pension funds,
comparison, 77–78
university endowments, 76–78
Energy (investor characteristic),
43
Engagement, board of directors
best practice, 380
Enron, values (challenge), 178
Entellium, fraud, 271–272, 401
Enterprise value, future projec-
tions basis, 322e
Entrepreneurial background,
importance, 33
Entrepreneurial experience,
impact, 119–120
Entrepreneurial mindset, 15
Entrepreneurs
goals, 305e
investment, example, 290–291
juniors, engagement, 31
personality/mindset, under-
standing, 271
respect, 238
Entrepreneurs-in-residence,
selection, 187
Equity preferred stock, 317
EquitZen, 449
Ernst & Young’s Guide to Going
Public, 436
Escrow account, estab-
lishment, 162
Escrows, 432
Ethics, 186
diligence, relationship, 299
Ethos, 173, 174
defining, 174–175
Eunoia, 174
Event-based triggers, 339
Exclusivity, 345, 429
Execution machine, 320
Exits
alignment, 398–402
average time to exit, 422e

-- 523 of 546 --

494 	Index
Exits (continued)
deal killers, 434
drivers, 417e
dual track, 435
exit range assumptions, 133e
exit-related
provisions, 342–344
liquidity events, 405
methods, 410e
multiples, 324
options, 407–409
potential, 320
preconditions, 410–415, 411e
primary path, 417–426
strategies, 407
value, alignment, 413
values, 132e
window, 413e
Exit timing
conflicts, 376
matters, 399
Expectations, LP selection
criteria, 197
Exploding term sheet, 51–52
F
Facebook, Thiel (angel investor
role), 312
Failure
instruction, 414–415
pattern-matching, rarity, 53
Fairchild Semiconductor, 195,
245, 249, 273, 328
Family offices
asset allocation, Cap Gemini
World Wealth Report, 86
numbers, Family Wealth Alli-
ance calculation, 85
Family offices, venture capital
provision, 84–86
Farmer, Chris, 229–231
Farner, Chris, 272
Feedback cycles, length, 46
Feld, Brad, 236, 239, 358
assistance, 16
board member role, 363
CEO/company needs, 388
exchange, difference, 373–374
LP actions, 447
path, emulation, 41
succession plan, absence, 66
term sheets, simplicity, 305–306
Felicis Ventures, 383
Ferris, Tim (hiatus), 67
Fiduciary duties, 359–360
Finance companies, venture capi-
tal provision, 83–84
Finance marketplaces, networks
(impact), 104
Financial audits, 402
Financial budgets,
importance, 302
Financial conflicts, 375
Financial interests, review, 188
Financial metrics, 320
usage, 321e
Financial records, usage, 432
Financial reporting, back office
offering, 189
Financial terms, 157–162, 157e
Financing
event, 442
milestone-based
financing, 349–350
risk, 329
rounds, weighted average anti-
dilution (usage), 335
Firm, operations fees, 6
FirstMark Capital, 247, 333, 382
experts, impact, 367
First Round Capital, 49, 133, 248
firm archetype, 173–174
investment miss, 318
value, delivery, 185–186
First-round financing, PwC
study, 379

-- 524 of 546 --

Index 	495
First-time entrepreneurs,
serial entrepreneurs
(contrast), 276–279
First-time funds
investment, LP
preference, 226e
LP search, 221
First-time investor,
avoidance, 222
Fisher Lynch Capital, 147
fund of funds, 98, 188
FLAG Capital Management,
62, 150, 448
Fletcher, Steve, 399
Floodgate Fund, 15, 41, 60
investment reasons, 295
investor encouragement, 42
startup investment, 257
Flow (Csikszentmihalyi), 176
Focus Ventures, network impor-
tance, 127–128
Follow-on financing risk, 329
Follow-on funding chal-
lenges, 397–398
Follow-on investments, 240
Follow-on rounds,
investment, 166
Follow-up/recordkeeping,
board of directors best
practice, 381
Forbes Midas List of Venture
Capitalists, 1
Ford Foundation, 78, 79, 221
motto, 137
Forge (Equidate), 449
Form S-1, filing, 440–441
Fortino, Adrian, 102, 295
Forward integration, 423
Foundation Capital, 68, 270
curveball question, 45
cybersecurity opportunities, 45
fundraising preparation, 44–46
Foundations, 76, 78–79
IRS regulation, 78
types, 78
Founders
liquidity preference, 332
strengths, amplification, 378
Founder’s Dilemma, The
(Wasserman), 392
Founder’s Fund, 290–291
Foundry Group, 16, 20, 236, 358
board member role, 363
firm archetype, 173
fund investment manage-
ment, 121, 193
fund of funds, management, 98
LP actions, 447
management fee per-
spective, 158
succession plan, absence, 66
term sheets, simplicity, 305–306
Fraud, 271–272
letter, example, 401
Frazier, Diana, 62, 448
data submission, 150
Free cash flows (FCF)
variable, 327
Freemium model, 299
Full ratchet antidilution pro-
vision, 334
FundersClub, 236
Funding Circle, 104
Funding milestones, 318
Fund of funds (FoF), 88, 89
access, 91
advantages, 89–92
business model, 92e
cost structure, 91–92
diversification, 91
efficiency, 91
government-sponsored funds,
contrast, 94
impact, 90
investment strategies, 92–94
strategies, comparison, 93e

-- 525 of 546 --

496 	Index
Fund-of-funds allocation, 227e
Fundraising, 193
drivers, conflicts, 374
probability, limitation, 172
process, 205, 206e
step function, 213
risks, identification/manage-
ment, 219–220, 220e
roadshow, 205
steps, 194–195
top-quartile venture firms
ability, 198
VC responsibility, 24–25
Funds. See Venture fund
Future financings, 337
G
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 395
Game theory, studying, 43–44
Gamification strategies, 114
Ganesan, Venky, 248
Garfinkle, Jan, 36, 38
Gates, Bill, 243
Gawande, Atul, 262
GCA Savvian, 399
Genentech, 84, 439
General accounting, back office
offering, 189
General Catalyst, 337
Generalists, specialists
(contrast), 126–127
General partners (GPs)
case study, 109, 116–117
expertise, 120e
financial commitment, 158
liquidity, 117
negotiated LP-GP
terms, 169–170
negotiated terms, pri-
ority, 169e
roles/responsibilities/
compensation, 7–10
success, guidelines, 216–217
terms, 167e
VC involvement, 5
Generational transfer/suc-
cession, 63
creation, 63–66
Geographic funds, 91
GGV-I, initiation, 223
Gladwell, Malcolm, 56
Global Accelerator, 239
Global Investment Team (MIT
Investment Management
Company), 77, 196, 222
God syndrome, 63–64
Goetz, Jim, 180
diversity, example, 181
generational transfer, LP
letter, 65–66
succession, 64–65
Goldman Sachs
hiring/retaining,
importance, 23
vampire squid metaphor, 173
Gompers, Paul A., 96, 179
Good faith actions, 360
Google
angel investor,
impact, 297–298
company purchase, 418–419
IPO, 440–441
meeting, 300–301
Google Ventures, 230–231
Governance, 166, 306, 340–342
improvement, 374
parenting, relationship, 358
performance, contrast, 399–400
quality, impact, 379–380
terms, 157e, 162–166, 341e
Government of Singapore Invest-
ment Corporation (GIC),
portfolio size, 82
Government-sponsored
funds, fund of funds
(contrast), 94

-- 526 of 546 --

Index 	497
Government surplus
capital, usage, 79
Grady, Pat, 31
career, reward, 388–389
LP letter writing, 190–191
succession description, 64
Graham, Paul
exploding term sheet, 51
junior partner observations,
32
Grant-making activities, 79
Greed
impact, 60–61
presence, 54
Greylock, management team
assessment, 284
Gross profits, net profits (con-
trast), 160
Group collaboration, 262
Groupthink, impact, 55
Grove Street Advisors
fund of funds, 140, 170
junior member exits,
problem, 122
Growth
potential, 293
rate/time period, 328
Guidant Corporation, 36–37
Gurley, Bill, 25–26
path, emulation, 41
selection ability,
importance, 112
H
Halo effect, 55–56, 287
Hand-off process, estab-
lishment, 396
Hanson, Scott, 247
Haque, Promod, 19
Harris, Clint, 122, 140
Harvard Business School, 370
Hayes, Rob (therapist
observations), 49
HealthDialog, 168
HealthMedia, 412
Hedge funds, 73
joining, 14
Heitzmann, Rick, 247, 333, 382
experts, impact, 367
Hero worship, 55–56
Hewlett Foundation, 66,
121, 128, 222
High-net-worth individu-
als (HNWIs)
emerging manager value, 225
resources/investment exper-
tise, pooling, 240
venture capital provi-
sion, 84–86
Hiring decisions, problems (VC
reasons), 287
Hit-miss ratio, 251
Ho, Karen, 430
Holding periods
finance company criterion, 83
shortness, advantages, 9e
Holland, Paul, 68–69
Holmes, Elizabeth, 271
Horizontal synergies,
occurrence, 423
Horsley Bridge Partners, 229
Howery, Ken, 290
How We Decide (Lehrer), 50
Hsieh, Tony, 434
Human capital, importance, 289
Hummer, John, 37
Hummer-Winblad, 37, 38
I
IBM, LP investment, 86
Illiquidity premium, 329
Illiquid security, price estab-
lishment, 323
Incentives, 312
managerial choices, 153
Indebtedness, impact, 51–52

-- 527 of 546 --

498 	Index
Indemnification (LPAC responsi-
bility), 165
Independent observations,
cultural composition
element, 369
Index Ventures, 229
Individual performance/attribu-
tion, 137–139
Individual performance,
format, 139e
Industry expertise, value
driver, 386–387
Industry knowledge/
insights, 378
Influence—Science and Practice
(Cialdini), 50
Information
asymmetrical value, 426
asymmetry, 444–445
flow, enhancement, 402
game dynamic, 44
rights, 313
Infrastructure, overin-
vestment, 108
Initial public offerings (IPOs),
183, 221, 307, 408, 435
execution/implementation
stage, 436–437
improvement, reasons, 408e
planning stage, 436
post IPO, 446–448
post-IPO, requirement, 395
process, 436–438
realization stage, 437
roadshow, 441
steps, 438–442, 438e
underpricing, 443–446
bigger fool theory, 444–445
Innovation, diffusion, 296e, 413e
Innovative opportunity, sources
(Drucker), 100e–101e
Innovator’s Dilemma, The
(Chistensen), 293
Insight hypothesis, building, 42
Institutional grade fund,
building, 108
Institutional investors
evaluation criteria, 95–96
returns, 202–203
Institutional Limited Partners
Association (ILPA)
best practices, 159, 166
fund performance report-
ing guidelines/
templates, 142
Institutional limited partners,
goals, 166–168
Institutional Venture Partners, 16
experience, importance, 48–49
Insurance companies
business model advan-
tage, 83–84
venture capital provi-
sion, 83–84
Intangible, assessment, 269
Intel, 439
capital, raising, 302
valuation process, 328
Intel Capital (Taber exit), 67–68
Intellectual dishonesty,
impact, 60–61
Intellectual property (IP) due
diligence, focus, 298
Intel, venture backing, 99
Interest rate, convertible note
term, 310–311
Interests, alignment, 166
assessment, 123e
cultural composition
element, 370
ensuring, 375–376
shift, 121
stakeholder interests, align-
ment, 410–413
Internal rate of return
(IRR), 218, 448

-- 528 of 546 --

Index 	499
deficiencies,
understanding, 139–140
fund performance
measure, 141
liquidation preference stack,
impact, 331e
measurement, 320
performance
measure, 59
variance, 151e
usage, 9
Internships, 30–31
language/handwriting,
attention, 30
opportunities, underes-
timation, 31
Interviewing, types, 287
Interviews, 22–23
language/handwriting,
attention, 30
Invesco, 223, 228
Invesco Private Capital, 225
Investing, improvement, 109
Investment Management Due Dili-
gence Association, sexual
harassment survey, 179–180
Investments
alternative investments, 75e
analysis, 147
financial metrics,
usage, 321e
approval, steps, 353–354
banker, hiring, 428–431
framework, 428–429
bottoms-up approach, 129
career, development, 41
CEO changes, 393e
committee composition, 187
decisions
determination,
criteria, 255, 257
decisions, vote
requirements, 188
front-end challenges, 8–9
income, endowment genera-
tion, 76–77
limitations (LPAC responsi-
bility), 163
opportunities, 259
handling, 58–59
sources, 232e
sourcing, 8
outcomes, 43
partners, lawsuits
(avoidance), 98
past investment activity, LP
selection criteria, 197
process, 88
importance, 255
sector/stage, LP selection
criteria, 196
selection, factors, 261e
size, LP selection criteria, 196
spray-and-pray investment
strategy, 135
strategy/criteria, 88
strategy, factors, 101
terms, 307e
theme, building, 102
thesis
building, top-down
approach, 103
network effects, power (USV
description), 104–105
SignalFire construc-
tion, 229–230
transactions, structuring, 303
venture fund strategy, 96
Investment teams
alignment, 121, 122–123
cohesion, LP assessment, 122
diligence, 119
dynamics, 121–128
incentives, alignment, 122
interest, alignment
(assessment), 123e

-- 529 of 546 --

500 	Index
Investment teams (continued)
members, vesting, 344–345
relationship, duration, 122
skill set, 121, 124
skills, venture fund manager
criterion, 120–121
soft skills, importance, 124, 126
spirit, 185
stability, 121, 122–123
Investor rights agreement
(IRA), 353
Investors
anchor investor, secur-
ing, 214–215
capital accounts, back office
maintenance, 190
communication preparation,
back office
offering, 190–191
fellowship, 33–34
goals, differences, 305e
lead investor, search, 214–215
pitch sessions, 246–248
placement agent intro-
duction, 170
portfolios, asset classes, 74e
quality, characteristics, 47–50
strengths, building, 41–47
waterfall presentation, 160e
IronPortSystems, 12
Ishiguro, Kazuo, 1
J
Jobs, Steve, 20, 237, 273
Apple investment opportu-
nity, 250–251
perspective, 57
vision, 391
Johnson, Pitch, 234
JP Morgan, 67
Judgment (investor
characteristic), 48–49
Junior people, impact, 32
Juniper Networks, venture
backing, 100
K
Kalaari Capital, 282
Kamra, Deepak, 12, 394
Kaplan, Steven N., 140, 275, 289
Kauffman Fellows Program,
31–34
characteristics, 34
Keehn, Peter, 201
Key person provisions (LPAC
responsibility), 164
Khosla Ventures, 247, 357
Khosla, Vinod, 357, 358
Kickstarter, impact, 104
Kim, Michael, 93
King, Larry L., 273
Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers
(KPCB), 25, 283, 348, 355
entrepreneur-in-residence, 234
founding/launch, 68, 84
management team
assessment, 285
opportunity, loss, 250
recruitment, 394
Top Tier Capital Partners
involvement, 92
Kola, Vani, 282
Koppelman, Josh, 133, 248
investment miss, 318
value, delivery, 185
Kramlich, C. Richard, 18, 36
lead investor search, 215
NEA founding, 30
talent, analysis, 48
turnover, 25–26
Kulkarni, Jayant, 247
L
Laffont, Thomas, 230
Lala, Apple purchase, 423
Langeler, Gerry, 249

-- 530 of 546 --

Index 	501
Lasky, Mitch, 259, 413
Lawson, Jeff, 178–179
Lazard, placement agent
services, 214
Lazarus, Steve, 26, 214–215, 221
Lead investor, search, 214–215
Lee, Jess, 180
recruitment, 181, 181e
Lehrer, Jonah, 50
Leone, Doug
generational transfer, LP
letter, 65–66
succession, 64–65
Lerner, Josh, 96
Lerner, Sandy, 394
Letter of intent (LOI)
culmination, 419
execution, 430
nonbinding LOI, 430
Levandov, Rich, 426
Levchin, Max (Thiel
partner), 294
Levensohn, Pascal, 392
Leveraged-buyout private
equity, 111
Levine, Seth, 20
management fee
perspective, 158
Lewis, Sinclair, 267
Liability risk, 447
Liew, Jeremy, 337
Lightspeed Venture Partners, 337
Limited partner advisory com-
mittee (LPAC), 162
confidentiality, 165–166
conflicts of interest, 163–164
guidelines, adoption, 165
indemnification/standard
of care, 165
investment limitations, 163
key person provisions, 164
no-fault divorce, 164
responsibilities, 163–166
Limited partner agreement (LPA)
examination, 170
terms, understanding, 169
Limited partners (LPs)
access, 205–214
behavioral challenges, GP
viewpoint, 218e
comparison, 86–88
creativity/hunger, 223–224
first-time fund investing pref-
erence, 226e
fund performance descrip-
tion, 96–97
generational transfer, LP
letter, 65–66
investment criteria, 96e
investor experience pref-
erence, 222
letter, writing, 190–191
mix, 74e
momentum, building, 109
negotiated LP-GP
terms, 169–170
negotiated terms, pri-
ority, 169e
outlay, variation, 198e
performance, 223–224
examination, 139
pitch guidelines, 208–209
portfolio, 200–203, 201e
understanding, dinner table
analogy, 202
presentations, 138
relationships, 5e
termination,
reasons, 170–172
selection
criteria, 195–197
problem, 72
succession, concern, 183
sweeteners, offers, 168
targeting, 195–199
terms, 167e

-- 531 of 546 --

502 	Index
Limited partners (LPs) (continued)
universe, 73
comparison, 87e
VC involvement, 5
Limited partnership agreement
(LPA), 155
LinkedIn, 22
connections, 56
share price, 444
LinkExchange, capital
investment, 434
Liquidation, 317
economic terms, 336e
multiples, 324, 329
Liquidation preference
excess, benefit, 332
stack, impact, 331e
variables, 313, 318, 330–333
Liquidity
events, 405
GP liquidity, 117
increase, 436
preference, 332
Listener, ability, 18, 49–50
Liu, Kelvin, 223
Logic, emotions (contrast), 54
Long, Augustine, 202, 210
first-time investor
avoidance, 222
fundraising process, step
function, 213
Longevity, ensuring, 374
Long-term relationships,
importance, 137
Losses, profits (relationship), 409e
Loss ratio, LP assessment, 147
LSI Logic
Draper III investment, 245
venture backing, 99
Luck, VC quality, 39
M
Macro-trends data, blending, 99
Management
churn, 329
due diligence,
approaches, 284–291
risk, 325
team
board of directors,
alignment, 412
feedback, 394
Management fees, 157–158
vesting scenarios, 158e
Managers, incentives
choices, 153
Managing directors,
involvement, 7
Managing GPs, involvement, 7
Maples, Mike, 15, 41, 60
investment reasons, 295
investor encouragement, 42
power law, understanding, 43
startup investment, 257
Maris, Bill, 230–231
Market
conditions, change, 131
demand function, 319
dynamics, changes, 12
forces, 60
intelligence (placement agent
role), 211–212
market-based challenges, 392
model, analysis, 293
opportunities, 99–102
readiness, 295
risk, 323
understanding, 293–294
timing, 199–200, 442
Marketing (VC
responsibility), 24–25
Markkula, Mike, 237, 251
Mathonet, Pierre-Yves, 97, 200
Mayfield Fund, 30, 247
management team
assessment, 284
McGuire, Terry, 56
candidate questions, 16

-- 532 of 546 --

Index 	503
job interview, 30
optimism, 18
McKinsey, 106
McRaney, David, 50–51
Mean deal values, 422e
Media, avoidance, 440–441
Mental models, usage, 42
Mentor capitalists, 12–13
Mentors network, building, 27
Mercury Fund, 102, 295
Mergers and acquisi-
tions, 342, 408
Meritech Capital, 174
Meyer, Thomas, 97, 200
Mezzanine funds, 91
Micro-management, 358
Micro-venture capital
funds, company
targeting, 93
Midcontinent US, VC spending
attraction, 102e
Milestone-based financing,
349–350
Milestone, definition, 350
Minder, James J., 283
Mini-LP-universe, 88
Mithril Capital, 280
MIT Investment Management
Company, 77, 196, 222
Mohan, Ravi, 387
Momentum, creation, 216–217
Moon shot investments, 46
Moore, Gordon, 442
Moore’s law, 47
Morgan Stanley Alternative
Investment
Partners, 199
Moritz, Michael, 10, 57, 323, 434
generational transfer, LP
letter, 65–66
succession, 64–65
Moxley, Brant, 23
Multifamily office (MFO), wealth
service, 85
Multiple of invested capital
(MOIC), 5, 218
usage, 9
Musk, Elon, 41, 355
investments, 290–291
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator
(MBTI), usage, 287
MySpace, deal, 419
N
Nada, Hany, 223, 235
Nahigian, T.J., 114
Narrow-based weighted
average, 334
Nasdaq SecondMarkets, 449
National Venture Capital Associa-
tion, 15, 18, 50
board membership, 39
personalities perspective, 182
Negative covenants, 353
Negative value, creation, 358
Negotiated LP-GP terms,
169–170
outsourcing, 91
parameters, 429
stress points, 304–306
Neis, John, 339–340
Nelsen, Robert, 26
sourcing opportunities, 242
NEON technology, 397–398
Net operating losses (NOL),
assumption, 432
Net present value (NPV), 327
approach, 319
basis, 140
Net profits, gross profits (con-
trast), 160
Netscape, investment oppor-
tunity, 249
Networks. See Data
angel networks, 238,
240–241
effects, power (USV
description), 104–105

-- 533 of 546 --

504 	Index
Networks. See Data (continued)
network-based
sourcing, 236–238
strength, understanding, 240
usefulness, 56
vulnerabilities, 103
New Enterprise Associates
(NEA), 18, 22, 25, 27, 47
ACS investment, 36
founding, 30
lead investor search, 215
management team
assessment, 284
portfolio, buildout, 46
New Enterprise Associ-
ates (NEA)’
talent, impact, 48
Newhouse, Doug, 213
New Schools Venture Fund, core
values, 177
Newton, Roger, 244
Nicolas, Christophe, 199
No-fault divorce (LPAC responsi-
bility), 164
Nominal value, 338
Nonbinding LOI, 430
Nondisclosure, 345
Noninfringement, 298
North Coast Technology
Investors, 362, 419
Norwest Venture Partners
(NVP), 371
multistage company
targeting, 134
No-shop clause, 345
O
Obligations, impact, 51–52
Observations, mental models
(usage), 42
Olin Cup, participation, 247
Omidyar, Pierre, 236
On-boarding checklist, 376
One-off event, impact, 147
One-upmanship, presence, 54
Open-minded decision-making
process, impact, 54
Operating system, venture firm
archetype, 182
Operational synergies, 423
Opportunity
competitive advantage, 293
embedding, 101
loss, 248–252
LP perspective, 200e
Optimism, 18
blind optimism, problem, 54
Options, 337–339
trading, 327
O’Reilly, Tim, 245
O’Relly AlphaTech Ventures
(OATV), 435
Osage University Partners, 242
Outcomes (game dynamic), 44
Overpricing, danger, 443–444
Ovitz, Michael, 184
OVP Venture Partners, 249
Ownership, 305–306
antidilution provisions,
impact, 335e
assumptions, 131e
build-up, 317
position, establishment, 317
thresholds, establish-
ment, 130–131
P
Page, Larry, 440–441
Pain/reflection equation, 52
Pandapas, Kimon G., 77,
196, 222
Parker, Sean, 248
Park Hill, placement agent
services, 214
Park Street Capital, emerging
manager approach, 226

-- 534 of 546 --

Index 	505
Participating preferred
variables, 330
Partners
motivations/alignment, 171
performance, 59
recruitment, example, 181e
track, eligibility, 29
Partnership, formaliza-
tion, 186–187
Past-oriented interviewing, 287
Pattern recognition, 358–359
PayPal, 294
Pay-to-Play, 336
Peer-level investor, assistance, 207
Peer reviews, 373
Pension Consulting Alliance
(PCA), prinicpals (interest
alignment), 123
Pension funds, 75–76
divisions, 91
endowments, comparison,
77–78
entity, separation, 76
Performance
analysis, 137, 143e–146e
benchmarks, 318
challenges, 392, 396–398
governance, contrast, 399–400
importance, 44
individual performance/attri-
bution, 137–139
individual performance,
format, 139e
measure, 140
performance-based trig-
gers, 159–160
performance-related chal-
lenges, springing
warrants (effective-
ness), 340e
value-creation metric, 379
venture fund manager
criterion, 120
Perkins, Georganne, 98, 147
GP money handling, 188–189
Perkins, Tom, 250, 283, 348
Holland profile, 68
Personality (investor charac-
teristic), 43
Personal values, alignment, 176
Person-to-person market-
places, 104
Pharmacia, Upjohn (merger), 244
Phronesis, 174
Piggyback rights, 343–344
Pincus, Mark, 236
Pinnacle Group, 23
Pirsig, Robert, 372
Pitch decks, negotiation, 7
Pitch sessions, 246–248
Placement agents, 170
engagement selectivity, 210
importance, 213
requirement, 209–214
role, analysis, 211–214
usage, Preqin surveys, 209–210
Players (game dynamic), 43
Polaris Ventures, 18, 56
initiation, 30
Politics, impact, 44
Polyvore, Yahoo! acquisition, 181
Portfolio
assumptions, 130e
bottom-up approach, 200–201
building, 253
CEOs/CTOs/CFOs, con-
nections, 186
construction, 129, 132e
LP selection criteria, 197
outcomes, frequency, 407e
Portfolio companies
CEO effectiveness, 395
improvement, 110–111
interaction, 373e
performance, benchmark, 437
VC activities, 382e

-- 535 of 546 --

506 	Index
Portfolio companies (continued)
warehousing,
question, 218–219
Post-investment monitoring (VC
responsibility), 24
Post-investment portfolio
management, out-
sourcing, 91–92
Power dynamics, impact, 44
Power law
distribution, 110
game, 108
understanding, 43
Power-play mode, 266
Preemptive rights, 336
Preferred equity, 309, 310e
Preferred stock
investment terms, 307e
value, growth, 317
Premiums/claims, co-
relationship, 84
Pre-money value, 306
Preparation, board of directors
best practice, 380
PricewaterhouseCoopers, financ-
ing study, 379
Pricing power, 300
Primary value proposition,
296–297
Principles, impact, 41–42
Private companies, comparable
method, 326e
Private equity, 73
Private Equity (Cendrowski), 189
Private exchanges, 408
Private foundations, 78
Private markets
allocation, growth, 82
reliance, increase, 81e
Private placement memorandum
(PPM), 155, 171
Proactive sourcing, 233–236
Probabilistic thinking,
usage, 42–43
Probitas Partners, 162, 210
Process, LP selection criteria, 197
Product
development stage, 297
evaluation, 296–298
growth potential, 297
lines, diversification, 423
market acceptance, 297
market adoption, 295
rate, 297
model, analysis, 293
planning, 387
products in-house,
building, 418
protection, 297
Profitability, improvement, 423
Profits, losses (relationship),
409e
Progress, equation, 53–54
Promod Haque, 371
Proprietary relationships, 251
Pro-rata rights, surrender, 345
Prospectus, filing, 440–441
Protective provisions, 342
Psychology, avoidance, 50–56
Publicly traded companies, com-
parable method, 326e
Public market equivalents
(PMEs), 140–141
Public markets
performance, VC fund perfor-
mance (contrast), 141e
status, 320
Public offering, conver-
sion, 343–344
Q
Qatalyst Partners, 418
Quantitative venture investing,
impact, 111–112

-- 536 of 546 --

Index 	507
Quantum computing, 46–47
Quartzy, founding, 247
Quasi-security, 304
Questioning, Socratic
method, 42
Quidisi, Amazon (impact), 420
R
Rabois, Keith, 247
Rahim, Taufiq, 27
Rainmakers, God syn-
drome, 63–64
Rappaport, Andy, 370, 375
Razor blade model, 299
Real estate, 73
Realized returns, measure-
ment, 148–150
Realized value, unrealized value
(contrast), 150
Reboot (Colonna), 67
Reciprocation, impact, 50–51
Reciprocity, power, 56
Recker, Timothy, 167
Redemption, 343
maturity, 318
Red herring, 440
Reed, Hastings, 68
Reference interviewing, 287
Regelman, Adam, 247
Registration rights, 343–344
Reim, C.J., 115
reMail, Google purchase, 425
Remains of the Day, The
(Ishiguro), 1
Renaissance Venture Capital
Fund (RVCF)
competitive advantage,
building, 102
fund of funds, 208
investments, 93–94, 137
presentations, 194
Renaissance Venture Fund, 17
Research and development
(R&D) spending, com-
parison, 243
Resources, value-creation
metric, 379
Retirement, time horizon, 122
Returns, 408e
expectations, 324
function, 59
generation, 59
probability, 132
improvement, 311
measurement, 9
power law, examination,
110–112
realized returns, measure-
ment, 148–150
Revenue
forecasting, 329
growth, 378
improvement, 423
increase, potential, 418
Richardson, Christy, 66, 121, 128
fund manager contact, 222
Right of first refusal (ROFR),
317–318, 336, 337
Risk-adjusted IRR delivery, 4
Risk diversification layers,
application, 91
Ritter, Jay, 443
Rizik, Christopher, 93, 126
cherry-picking pers-
pective, 138
competitive advantage, 102
entrepreneurs, attraction, 238
fund presentations, 194, 207
patience, 18
world, awareness, 17
Roadmap investing, 103
Roadshow, 205, 441
presentations, 441–442
Roberts, Bryce, 37, 245, 435

-- 537 of 546 --

508 	Index
Robertson Stephens and Com-
pany, venture fund
investments, 38
Rock, Arthur
Apple investment, 244
CEO firing, 391
Forbes profile, 30
fundraising, 102
Holland profile, 68
Intel capital, raising, 302
Role models, 357–359
Rothenberg, Mike, 220
Rothenberg Ventures, SEC accu-
sations, 220
Roth, Mark, 242
Royan, Ajay, 280
Rozenblit, Igor, 210, 214
Rubin, Andy, 423
Rudnick, Seth, 446
Russell 3000, bench-
mark index, 97
S
S-1, filing. See Form S-1
Sabet, Bijan, 295
Sacca, Chris, 50
Saint Exupéry, Antoine de, 298
Sale terms, shareholder
lawsuits, 397
Sand Hill Road, 153, 449
competitiveness, 33
fundraising, 3
operation, 26–27
portfolio company CEO effec-
tiveness, 395
trade conference
attendance, 245
San Francisco Employees Retire-
ment System (SFERS)
pension fund, 93
SAP, LP investment, 86
Sapphire Ventures, 12
Sarbanes-Oxley, 103
Scheer, David, 244
Schmidt, Eric, 300, 441, 445
Schoen, Andrew, 46
Schumpeter, Joseph, 11
Secondary markets, 408
Secondary sales, 449
Sector-focused funds, 91
Securities
protection, 340–342
purchase right, 338
SEC registration, 436
value/preferences, 342
Securities and Exchange Com-
mission (SEC) rules,
compliance, 439
Seed financing, PwC study, 379
Seed fund, examination, 130
Seed-stage investment, staged
financing (usage), 349–350
Seed-stage investors, ROFR, 336
Self-education, 361–362
Self-evaluations, 374
Self-orientation, 361
Self-reporting, veracity, 150
Self-selection bias, 150–153
Senkut, Aydin, 383
Sequoia Capital, 12, 27, 47,
57–59, 323, 355
board of directors, meetings
(effectiveness),
384–385, 386e
company elements, 264
diversity, example, 180–181
ethos, defining, 174–175
fundraising, 195
generational transfer, LP
letter, 65–66
LinkExchange capital
investment, 434
LP letter writing, 190–191
meetings
effectiveness, 384–385
structuring, 385

-- 538 of 546 --

Index 	509
personnel, selection, 286
pitch sessions, 247
solution, creation, 294
sourcing, 31
succession, 63–64
survival, 128
teams, transition, 67
Serial entrepreneurs, first-time
entrepreneurs (con-
trast), 276–279
Series Seed term sheet, 313
Service provider selection, 186
Sexual harassment, Investment
Management Due
Diligence Association
survey, 179–180
Shareholder
interests, 410
lawsuits, 397
value, 362
maximization, 364–365
SharesPost, 449, 450
Shares, redemption, 408
Shaszta Ventures, 387
Shockley, William, 272–273
Shriram, K. Ram, 243,
250, 297–298
Side letters, usage, 165
Siegler, M.G., 425
SignalFire, investment thesis
(building), 229–230
Signal-to-noise ratio, 225
Simple agreement for future
equity (SAFE), Y
Combinator introduc-
tion, 312–313
Simple Guide to the Basic Respon-
sibilities of VC-Backed
Company Directors, 372
Single-family office (SFO), wealth
service, 85
Situational awareness, 16
Smart, Geoff, 275–276, 284
Smart Things, invest-
ment, 115–116
Smith, Kenneth (emerging man-
ager approach), 226
Smith & Wesson Holding Corpo-
ration, 283
SNAP, IPO, 337
Social capital (placement agent
role), 211–212
Social Capital, investment
team loss, 220
Social networks, 298
startups, 280
Socratic method, 42, 266–267
Softbank Vision, fundraising, 3
Software as a Service (SaaS), 387
Solo VC, lessons, 108–109
Something Ventured (Holland), 68
Son, Masayoshi
fundraising, 3
internal rate of return (IRR), 4
trend, 4
Sonsini, Wilson, 314
Sourcing
abilities, 218
honing, 237–238
advantage, 238, 242
channels, 233e
funnel, 232e
investment opportunities, 229
network-based
sourcing, 236–238
opportunities, 242
proactive sourcing, 233–236
process, 229–231, 237
strategy, 147
VC responsibility, 24–25
Sourcing, improvement, 109, 110
Sovereign funds, objectives, 80
Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs),
79–82, 159
size, growth, 80–81, 81e
venture opportunity, 80e

-- 539 of 546 --

510 	Index
SpaceX
building cost, 41–42
investments, 290–291
Spark Capital, 247
investment reasons, 295
Specialists, generalists (con-
trast), 126–127
Spectrum auctions, 103
Spiegel, Evan, 337
Spray-and-pray investment
strategy, 135
Springing warrants, 339–340
effectiveness, 340e
Square, 235
success, 248
Stack Exchange, 104
Stage-centric funds, 91
Stair-stepped interest rate, 312
Stakeholders, interests (align-
ment), 410–413
Standard and Poor’s
500 (S&P 500)
benchmark index, 97
investment, performance
measure, 140
Standard deviation, 90
Standard of care (LPAC responsi-
bility), 165
Stanwich Advisors, 210, 222
Startup Boards (Feld/Ramsin-
ghani), 358
Startups
no-name entity status, 19
product-market fit, 295
structure, 364
Statement of net returns,
sharing, 153
State-owned investment funds,
government surplus capi-
tal (usage), 79
Status-plays, presence, 54
StepStone Group, 223, 224
Stock options, 337–338
employee stock options, 338
programs, 341
Stocks
public equities, 73
purchase, asset purchase (con-
trast), 432
transactions, impact, 433
Straight convertible preferred/
nonparticipating
variable, 330
Strategy
game dynamic, 44
value-creation metric, 379
Strike price, 338
Structuring/execution (VC
responsibility), 24
Succession. See Generational
transfer/succession
Super pro-rata, 337
Suster, Mark, 311
Sutter Hill Ventures, 43
Swartz, James R., 16,
53, 235, 394
Sweeteners, impact, 168
Swensen, David, 151
Switch Ventures
founding, 107
performance, 107e
Syndicate partners, selection
(factors), 348e
Syndicating invest-
ments, 347–349
Syndication, factors, 347e
T
Taber, Igor, 265
Intel Capital exit, 67–68
Tagalong rights, 343
Taleb, Nicholas Naseem, 13, 263
Talent
attraction, 378
focus, 184
transition, 35

-- 540 of 546 --

Index 	511
Tamayo-Rios, Matthew, 378
Tandem Computers, 84, 348
venture backing, 99
Tan, Lip-Bu, 379, 387
Target returns
finance company criterion, 83
generation, 323
Tavel, Sarah (selection
process), 23
Teams. See Investment teams
Technology
companies, growth, 422
failure, risks, 329
risk, 323
trends, awareness, 16–17
Techstars, 195
accelerator, 239
network, 299
growth, 239e
Telefónica, 109
Temasek Holdings,
portfolio size, 82
Term, 338–339
Terms, 346e
flexibility, 346e
Term-sheetizator, devel-
opment, 314
Term sheets
closing process, 353
conditions, 345
line-by-line explanations/
analysis, 303
negotiation, 7
offer, 236–237
sample, 314–315
simplicity, 305–306, 313–314
spirit, 304
structure, 309
understanding, difficulty, 303
Tesla Motors, 291
investment opportunity, 250
T-Gap Ventures, 38, 238, 272,
333, 350
Therapist, role (investor charac-
teristic), 49–50
Thesis. See Investments
Thiel, Peter, 414
angel investor role, 312
companies, abilities, 260
junior person observations, 32
Levchin, partnering, 294
trend, 295–296
Thinking in Bets (Duke), 42
Thought leaders, focus, 184
Time horizon, 122
finance company criterion, 83
Timing
importance, 412
LP selection criteria, 197
Tipping Point, The (Gladwell), 56
Tiwari, Amit, 225
Tomo Therapies, 339–340
Top-quartile managers, selec-
tion, 151–152
Top Tier Capital Partners, 92
fund of funds, 97–98
portfolio management, 135
Top-tier venture capitalists, coin-
vestment, 378–379
Total addressable market (TAM),
importance, 280
Total value to paid-in (TVPI),
218
capital, 140
TPG Growth, 55
Trade conferences, useful-
ness, 244–246
Trade sale, 408
process, 427e
Transactions
networks, impact, 104
structuring, ability, 218
Transparency, 166
absence, 327
necessity, 54
Trivedi, Sid, 45, 270

-- 541 of 546 --

512 	Index
True Ventures, Top Tier Capital
Partners involvement, 92
Trust
cultural composition
element, 369
establishment, 372–373
(Honest) Truth about Dishonesty,
The (Ariely), 55
Tuenti, 109
Twilio, 178
Twitter, 235, 248, 295
investment, miss, 318
scale requirement, 104
U
UBS, placement agent ser-
vices, 211, 214
Uncertainty, comfort (investor
characteristic), 47
Uncork VC, 17
Underwriters
hiring, 439–440
underpricing claim, 443
Unequals, partnership, 349
Unicorns, creation, 5
Union Square Ven-
tures (USV), 67
network effects, power
(description), 104–105
Twitter valuation, 248
web presence, 27
University endowments, 76–78
University research, commerciali-
zation, 241–243
University startups, monetization
process, 242
Unrealized value
measurement, 149e
realized value, contrast, 150
User experience, exami-
nation, 105
US Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA), 165
V
Valentine, Donald T., 48, 285, 357
change, necessity, 12
fundraising, 195
Holland profile, 68
Jobs/Markkula, contact, 237
personnel, selection, 291
succession, 64
Valuation, 165
development, 342
drivers, 319–320
market demand function, 319
methods, 318–319
negotiation, 7, 419
setting, factors, 321e
tweet example, 325
Value
adding, 109
asymmetrical value, 426
creation, 15, 260, 355, 375, 377
governance quality,
impact, 379–380
metrics, 379
VC activities, 382e
delivery, 185
driver, 386–389
pre-money value, 306
shareholder value, 362
unrealized value
measurement, 149e
realized value, contrast, 150
Values, 173, 174–186
core values, 177
example, 178
discussion, 176
framework, 177e
integrity, relationship, 270–272
personal values, alignment, 176
words, equivalence, 178–179
Van Hell, Kenneth, 138, 147, 199
Venrock, 242, 249
Venture-backed boards,
stresses, 391–392

-- 542 of 546 --

Index 	513
Venture-backed startups
CEO/executive
replacement, 393
impact, 289
Venture backing, exam-
ples, 99–100
Venture bucket, competi-
tion, 89–90
Venture capital, 73
asymmetrical information/
value, 426
business model, 4e
churn level, 59
cold-calling, 27
entry points, 36e
fund managers, universe (evo-
lution), 91
fund performance, public
market performance (con-
trast), 141e
industry best practices, 167e
investing, intellectual stim-
ulation, 12
investments, delusions, 51–52
opportunity, 38–39
performance, measure, 140
talent, transition, 35
Venture Capital Due Diligence
(Camp), 343
Venture capitalists (VCs)
action, bias, 20
annual self-review,
criteria, 403–404
asymmetrical rewards, 13–14
attributes, 15
board selection, 72
business, perspective, 72
career, 61–62
challenges, 57–61
selection, reasons, 11
competitive advantages, 106
creation, 1–2
delusions, 51–52
Doerr training, 38–39
emotional/intellectual
demands, 57–59
entry, 21
exit, 67–69
goal, 15
guidance, 94
incentives, misalignment, 60
Jobs perspective, 57
learning/growth, ability, 18–19
listener, ability, 18
long-term success, 19
mentor opportunities, 12–13
optimism/patience/stability,
importance, 18
periodic reviews, 402
position, interviewing, 28–29
quality, 39
reinvention, willingness, 19
relationships, 52
contacts, impor-
tance, 127–128
responsibilities, 22, 24–25
returns, generation, 59
roles, 22–27
sales ability, 216–217
situational awareness, 16
solo VC, lessons, 108–109
spending, midcontinent US
attraction, 102e
toxicity, 61
up-rounds/syndications,
presence, 240
valuation, minimum, 381
value add, CEO perspec-
tive, 381–389
VC-backed companies, liquidity
events, 421e
Venture Club (Cornell Uni-
versity), 46
Venture firms
activity, description, 29
administration, 188–191

-- 543 of 546 --

514 	Index
Venture firms (continued)
agency role, 183–185
archetype
forms, 173–174
operating system, 182
community platform
role, 185–186
complementary skills, 125e
cowboys, perspective, 182–183
culture, 173, 175–186
definition, 6
environment, description, 29
ethos, 173–175
governance, 186–191
institutional investor cri-
teria, 95–96
investment process, 231e
one-stop shop, creation,
184–185
operational elements, 187e
operational guidelines, 187–188
operations, 186, 188–191
opportunities, 231
LP viewpoint, 200e
performance, measurement
process, 29
placement agent need, 210–211
questions, examples, 28–29
strategy, differences, 101e
survival rate, 329, 329e
valuation, calculation, 328
values, 173, 175–186
Venture fund, 91
attorney, selection, 169–170
capital flow, 88
case studies, 109–117
creation, 6–7
criteria, 97–98
definition, 6
entry points, 34–37
financial terms, 157–162, 157e
first-time funds, fundraising
probability (limitation), 172
foundational steps, 203
fund-level carry calcu-
lation, 160
fund-level perfor-
mance, 141–148
gains, 134e
governance terms,
157e, 162–166
investment
strategy, 28–29, 96
defining, 99
terms, 155
IRR performance vari-
ance, 151e
LP due diligence, 95
LP mix, 74e
management fee vesting sce-
narios, 158e
managers
capital ownership, 122
criteria, 120–121
evaluation, 119–121
expertise, 95–96
organization chart, 8e
ownership, decrease, 339
performance, 59, 171
benchmarked format,
142e, 148e
description, 96–97
measure, 141
stand-alone format, 142e
portfolio, 8–9
returns, 9e
raising, 71
risk, cap, 131
selection criteria, 98e
size, 129, 134e, 172
factors, 130e
strategy, 108
elements, 118
terms, 156e
placement agent
role, 212, 214

-- 544 of 546 --

Index 	515
trends (placement agent
role), 212, 214
Venture investing,
hit-or-miss game, 52
Venture Investors, 339
Venture investors, diversity
(absence), 179–180
Venture partners, selection, 187
Venture practitioners, moti-
vation, 418
Venture returns, right-skewed
distribution, 110e
Vesting provisions, 318
Vintage year, 91
usage, 149
VMWare, 250
Volatility
finance company criterion, 83
impact, 13–14
W
Walden International, 379
Wang, Sophie, 179
Ward, Rob, 174
Warrants, 312, 337–339
purchase right, 338
springing warrants, 339–340
Wasserman, Noam, 371, 392
Waterfall, 160–161
presentation, 161e
Wealth, control (World Wealth
Report), 84
Web presence, 27
Weighted average antidilution,
usage, 335
Weiss, Scott, 12
Who: The A Method for Hiring
(Smart), 275, 285
Williams, Kelly, 155
Wilson, Fred (Colonna part-
nership), 67
Wilson Sonsini Goodrich and
Rosati (WSGR), online
tool, 313–314
Winners, selection (ability), 17
Winning, ability, 219
W.K. Kellogg Foundation, 78
Work
product, value driver, 388
skepticism, 402
Workday, Identified sale,
113–114
Workday Ventures, 114
World, change, 271–272
World Wide Web, emergence, 45
Wozniak, Steve, 250, 273
X
Xerox, opportunities, 243
XFund, legal fight, 220
Y
Yale University, endowment
(asset allocation), 77e
Yale University Investments
Office, 77
Y Combinator, 32, 52, 239
attendance, 247
SAFE, usage, 312–313
Z
Zappos, 412
Zen and the Art of Motorcycle
Maintenance (Pirsig), 372
Zero to One (Thiel), 260
Zip2 (Musk venture), 290
Zuckerberg, Mark, 234–235
Zynga, 236

-- 545 of 546 --

WILEY END USER LICENSE
AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s
ebook EULA.

-- 546 of 546 --

