PEACEFUL INVESTING
A Simple Guide to Hassle-free Stock Investing
Dr Vijay Malik
vijay.malik@drvijaymalik.com
www.drvijaymalik.com	www.drvijaymalik.com

-- 1 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
1 |	1 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.

-- 2 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
2 |	2 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Table of Contents
1) 	Getting the Right 	Perspective towards 	Investing ................................................................. 4
2) 	Choosing the Stock 	Picking Approach suitable to 	you ......................................................... 7
3) 	Why I 	Left Technical Analysis And Never Returned To It! ..................................................13
4) 	Shortlisting 	Companies 	for 	Detailed Analysis .....................................................................18
5) 	How to 	conduct Detailed Analysis of a 	Company 	...............................................................25
6) 	Understanding the 	Annual Report of 	a Company ...............................................................31
7) 	How to do 	Financial Analysis of 	a Company ......................................................................43
8) 	7 Signs to tell whether a Company is cooking its Books: “Financial Shenanigans”.............52
9) 	Self-Sustainable Growth Rate: a measure of Inherent Growth Potential of a Company......60
10) 	How to do 	Valuation Analysis of 	a Company ..................................................................68
11) 	Hidden Risk 	of Investing in 	High P/E 	Stocks...................................................................73
12) 	How to earn 	High Returns at Low Risk 	- Invest in Low 	P/E Stocks 	.................................81
13) 	3 Principles to Decide the Investable P/E Ratio of a Stock for Value Investors ...............88
14) 	How to 	do Business 	& Industry 	Analysis of 	a Company ................................................103
15) 	Is 	Industry P/E 	Ratio Relevant 	to 	Investors?.................................................................112
16) 	Why Management Assessment is the Most Critical Factor 	in Stock Investing? ............. 121
17) 	Steps to 	Assess Management Quality before 	Buying Stocks 	(Part 1) ...........................133
18) 	Steps to 	Assess Management Quality before 	Buying Stocks (Part 2) ...........................144
19) 	Steps to 	Assess Management Quality before 	Buying Stocks (Part 3) ...........................156
20) 	3 Simple Ways to Assess "Margin of Safety": The Cornerstone of 	Stock Investing....... 161
21) 	7 Important Reasons Why Every Stock Investor should read Credit Rating Reports..... 171
22) 	Final 	Checklist for 	Buying Stocks..................................................................................181
23) 	5 	Simple Steps 	to Analyse 	Operating Performance of 	Companies ............................... 185
24) 	How to 	Monitor Stocks 	in Your 	Portfolio........................................................................192
25) 	Understanding 	& 	Interpreting 	Quarterly Results 	Filings 	of 	Companies ..........................197
26) 	How Many 	Stocks Should 	You Own 	In 	Your Portfolio? 	.................................................210
27) 	Trading Diary 	of 	a Value 	Investor .................................................................................215
28) 	When to 	Sell 	a 	Stock? ..................................................................................................222
29) 	3 Guidelines for 	Selecting Stocks 	Ideal for 	Retail Equity Investors ............................... 227
30) 	Premium 	Services ........................................................................................................ 235

-- 3 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
3 |	3 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.

-- 4 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
4 |	4 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Every investor has a dream that she should create a portfolio of stocks, which should generate wealth for
her. The portfolio should become an alternative source of income for 	her. The portfolio should support her
in the hard work to sustain and improve the financial position of her family, her lifestyle and if possible
give her an opportunity to retire early and fulfil all her dreams: travel, adventure and doing things she is
passionate 	about. 	I 	have 	the 	same 	dreams 	and 	desire 	that 	my 	stock 	portfolio should 	generate 	sufficient
income; so that I might not need to work at a job as a necessary means to earn my livelihood. Monitoring	
my portfolio would be the only thing needed and 	I do not think of portfolio management as 	a job. It is 	my
passion, which makes me feel lively and rejuvenated.
Many acclaimed people have already achieved that dream through stock investments, both in India and
abroad. The accomplishments of Warren Buffett and 	Rakesh Jhunjhunwala can be cited as good examples.
Warren Buffett buys the stakes and stocks in the 	companies, in which he would like to, invests through his
parent holding company 	Berkshire Hathaway. Those companies, in which he has invested earn profits and
send the majority of the cash back to the parent company (Berkshire), which Warren further invests.
Warren, currently 84 years of age, enjoys his job so much that he often says that if loving one’s job ensured
long life, then he would never die. His personal wealth is about $ 67 billion. I do not know whether my
portfolio would ever be able to reach those levels. It is in the time to come when we will see how far I will
be able to go. I believe that anyone who is able to put in the required hard work can do the same.
It is the single most important quality required in a person who wants to be a successful stock market
investor. Many successful investors like Benjamin Graham, Peter Lynch etc. have written books sharing
their knowledge about stock investments. They have explained the stock picking process in a very
simplified manner. Reading these books is the first step 	in this journey of stock investments.
This is another very important quality needed for a good stock market investor. The role of emotions in
investments has assumed such significance that a separate field called “Behavioral Finance” has been
created for it. Stock market investing requires a long-term approach and you have to stay invested in the
market for a long time to reap the benefits. Investors face many emotions during their stay in the stock
market. Emotions like fear, greed 	and frustration make investors take impulsive decisions of entry and exits
during short phases of market ups & 	downs. When stock prices go up, the investors try to 	make short-term
profits and thus sell their investments early. Many times, after investors sell, stock markets keep on rising
further and investors are not able to reinvest their money and the market runs away from them. Market
movements are highly unpredictable. Investors need to 	stay invested in stocks of 	good companies for long
periods to make significant wealth. Jeanne Sahadi, a CNNMoney.com senior columnist writes:

-- 5 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
5 |	5 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
"Missing out on those high-return months (the timing of which you can't predict) can
cost you a lot. A hundred dollars invested from 1926 to 2006 in the S&P 500 would
have yielded $307,700, according to Ibbotson. But if you missed the 40 months with
the highest returns you would have ended up with 	- no kidding - $1,823 only."
When stock prices go down, many investors fail to analyze the reasons of fall in the stock prices. Some
investors are gripped with fear. They sell a good company whose stock price had fallen due to general
market sentiment and not due to poor performance of the company. They should actually be buying more
stocks of that company at cheaper 	valuations. Other investors show opposite behavior and do not sell a poor
performing company despite the huge decline in its stock price because they hate to book losses. It is said
that one should buy stocks; the way they buy their vegetables & groceries; one should buy more when
prices are down.
Therefore, one needs to be in control of one’s emotions and should develop the patience to delay the short	-
term gratifications. One should be able to visualize the wealth, which markets are able to create over very
long periods. Reading about the behavior of 	successful investors and observing their actions during different
phases of stock markets, will help in developing the emotional control required to 	be a successful investor.
Finance & investing are not rocket science. Business families have been able to teach fundamentals of
finance to their children within confines of their homes. The same phenomenon of simple conceptual
understanding always stands true in finance & investing. You need to get clarity on some basic 	concepts of
finance and you would have gained the foundation to start investing. Good reading habit will help you to
build on that foundation.
You do not need to be a mathematician to succeed in stock market investing. The math you will need for
investing is taught during school education. You do not 	require more than the 	ability to carry out the 	basic
calculations. If someone says that, 	you need advanced mathematics for investing, she 	is confusing you and
you should ignore such advice.
Investing requires a lot of common sense and control of emotions. If you are able to learn basic concepts,
are able to 	read further to build upon the 	existing knowledge and keep patience & self-control during stock
market highs & lows, then you 	have what it needs to 	become a successful investor.
Once one has read the required books of successful authors, the person will be able to understand the basic
framework about stock market functioning. She will also get to know about various characteristics and

-- 6 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
6 |	6 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
parameters of stocks to be looked into while doing 	stock investment. She should note down and keep a list
of these parameters with her when analyzing stocks to see how these parameters apply when doing the
actual stock analysis.
Then she should start exploring stock markets to identify the best stocks for 	her. Financial newspapers (e.g.
Business Standard, Economic Times etc.), business magazines (e.g. Business Today), stocks magazines
(e.g. Dalal Street, Capital Markets etc.) and websites (e.g. Moneycontrol etc.) are good sources to start
looking for potential stocks for 	detailed analysis.

-- 7 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
7 |	7 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
If we read about the experiences of successful investors, we will find that each one of them had their own
specific methodology of picking stocks. They, in turn, might have been inspired by other successful
investors. However, there is not any one specific approach of stock picking, which has made them
successful.
Benjamin Graham focused on investing in stocks that were selling at a discount to their fair value. This is
an example of Value 	Investing approach. Philip Arthur Fisher (Phil Fisher) focused on investing in stocks
that were capable of growing at a faster pace as compared to their peers. 	He justified paying a premium for
such high growth stocks and did not stress too much on finding stocks selling at a discount to their fair
value. This is an example 	of Growth Investing approach.
Warren Buffett studied under Benjamin Graham during college and therefore focused more on value
investing in the initial stages of his career. However, later on, he incorporated guidelines of Phil Fisher in
his investment philosophy. Now, as per Buffett, 	his investment methodology is a mix of 	about 85% Graham
and 15% Fisher.
So we can see 	that there is not only one single defined approach to achieve success in stock picking. In fact,
it is rightly said that ‘All roads lead to Rome’. However, each one of these approaches has their own pros
and cons. These stock-picking approaches might differ in terms of the types of the stocks they focus on.
These approaches might also differ in terms 	of the amount of time 	& effort required from investors and in
many more ways. A stock-picking approach, which is suitable for one investor may not be suitable for
another. However, it is easy to find the stock-picking approach or a mix of the approaches, which will be
suitable for an investor. This chapter 	would help the readers in find 	such a suitable stock-picking approach.
I have discussed various approaches to stock picking below. We, as investors, should learn a bit about these
different stock-picking approaches and then select the approach or the 	mixture of approaches, which appeals
to us.
Fundamental analysis of a stock involves understanding the underlying business of a company. While doing
fundamental analysis, the investor tries to find out a 	company, which has a very 	good product, well-known
customers, stable suppliers, honest & capable management etc. Once the investor finds such a company,
she can invest in its stock and expect to benefit from the future growth of the business of the company.
Fundamental analysis is very similar to the in-depth analysis, which an entrepreneur will do 	before starting
a new business. I believe that the fundamental analysis approach to stock picking is, in fact, a form of
entrepreneurship.

-- 8 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
8 |	8 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Technical analysis involves analyzing 	charts of the past movements of a stock’s price and its trading volume
over the different time periods. It involves understanding the patterns in the charts containing data of a
stock’s price movement in the past. The investor then tries to predict futureprice movement of the stock
based on these 	past patterns. Once the 	investor finds a stock 	whose price is 	expected to move higher, 	she
buys it and holds it until the chart patterns indicate that the price 	is expected to fall or become stable. The
investor following technical analysis is concerned only with the past prices and trading volume data of the
stock. The investor is indifferent to whether the stock is a manufacturing, an agricultural or a financial
services company.
Most of the successful stock market investors have followed the fundamental analysis. Fundamental
analysis treats stock investment as a way of having ownership in a company’s business. This approach
allows an investor to benefit from the enormous wealth, which is generated 	by owning a successful business
over a long period of time. On the other hand, Technical analysis tries to predict the next ‘up move’ in a
stock’s price and is indifferent to the 	company’s business.
In fundamental analysis, once an investor has found a good company, she stays invested in its stock for
decades. Hence, if the investor was able to make at least a few good stock investing decisions in her life,
she will be able to earn a great amount of 	wealth. In technical analysis, the investor buys a stock just before
the next ‘up move’ in its price. She sells the stock after the up move has happened or if the up move does
not occur and the buying decision has been proved wrong. In technical analysis, the investor keeps the stock
with herself only for a few days or weeks. Many a time, investors try to buy and sell stocks with a few
minutes during a day. Such kind of investment behavior requires the investor to keep finding right stocks
every few 	minutes/days/weeks.
Almost all the successful investors say that finding good stocks for investment is difficult. Therefore, if 	an
investor has found such a stock, then she should stay invested in it for long periods. Selling a good stock
only after one ‘up move’ in its price is not a 	winning decision in long term. Stock markets are 	very volatile
and the periods of up & down moves in a stock’s price are going to be very frequent. Therefore, an investor
should not fall prey to greed and she should not sell her stock when the prices move up immediately after
she buys it. Moreover, the investor should stay invested in the stock until the company keeps on growing
its business consistently.
I started stock market investing in 2006 by learning technical analysis. However, with 	the continued reading
and personal experiences in stock picking, I realized that fundamental analysis is a better approach to stock
picking. Therefore, I have been selecting stocks by using fundamental analysis since 2008.

-- 9 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
9 |	9 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Fundamental analysis has different sub-approaches to stock picking. All 	these sub-approaches focus on the
underlying business of the companies. However, they differ in 	the methods of selecting stocks for detailed
analysis and the features of stocks, 	which are focused on future 	gains.
Top Down approach:	Top Down approach:
Top down approach to the fundamental analysis is also called EIC 	(economy-industry-company) approach.
In the top-down approach, an investor tries to identify those economies (countries) of the world, which are
expected to grow at a faster pace than other economies. Once the investor has found such economies, she
studies them in detail. Within these economies, the investor tries to identify the industries, which are
expected to witness higher growth than other industries. Once the investor has identified high growth
industries in selected economies, she tries to 	find out the companies in 	these high growth industries, which
are expected to benefit the most from such expected growth. Once the investor has finalized the list of such
companies, she buys stocks of these companies. The investor expects to benefit from the higher earnings,
which these companies are expected to create over next many years.
Bottom Up approach:	Bottom Up approach:
The bottom-up approach to the fundamental analysis involves identifying companies, which are expected
to grow their business without restricting the stock-picking search to any particular industry or economy
(country). All the stocks listed on all the stock exchanges in the world, irrespective of country or industry	
of operation, are open for 	selection to the investor. The investor uses various selection criteria to search for
the best stocks. Such selection criteria help an investor find out the companies he likes e.g. the fastest
growing companies across all sectors or the companies, which are selling at a discount to the cash in their
bank accounts. Once the investor finds a good company, he buys its stock and 	expects to benefit from the
future growth of the business of the 	company.
Comparison between Top Down and Bottom Up approaches:	Comparison between Top Down and Bottom Up approaches:
Top down approach limits an investor’s analysis 	of stocks of only a few countries and a few industries.
However, the bottom-up approach does not have this limitation. The bottom-up approach provides an
investor with the option of investing in those companies, which are doing very good but are in industries,
which are currently not doing well. Such companies are known to make huge wealth for investors. Peter
Lynch, the fund manager of Fidelity Magellan Fund from 1977 to 1990, has recommended investing in
such companies in his book One Up 	on the Wall Street.
Thus, we can see that bottom-up approach gives an investor more options to choose his stocks for
investment.

-- 10 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
10 |	10 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Growth Investing:	Growth Investing:
In growth investing approach to fundamental analysis, the investor tries to find such companies, which are
expected to witness a very 	high growth in business performance in 	future. Once the investor has 	found such
a company, she buys 	its stocks. The investor expects to benefit from 	the future high growth of the 	business
of the company.
Value Investing:	Value Investing:
The investor following the value-investing approach of 	fundamental analysis tries to find the 	fair value of
the stock of a company by analyzing various business and financial parameters of the company. After
calculating the fair value of the stock of a company, the investor compares it with the current market price
on a stock exchange. If 	the investor finds that the current stock price of the 	company is lower than the fair
value of its stock as 	per her calculations, she buys the 	stocks of the company. The investor expects to 	benefit
from the increase in 	the stock price after-market discovers the discount in 	the stock value and increases the
stock price to its fair value.
Comparison between Growth Investing and Value Investing approaches:	Comparison between Growth Investing and Value Investing approaches:
In growth investing approach, the investor puts more focus 	on the future growth of 	the company and ignores
the current valuation levels of its stock as compared to the ongoing/past 	performance 	of the 	company’s
business. The investor buys its stock at whatever price it is currently 	available in the stock market.
Value investing approach of stock picking is equivalent to finding goods selling at a discount in any market
place e.g. a grocery store. A value investor will not 	buy the stock 	of a company, which 	is expected to 	show
good business performance in future if its stock is currently selling at a price higher than its fair value. The
value investor would think that the 	current expensive valuation has already increased the price 	of the stock
of that company to such an extent that the potential of increase in the stock price in future is limited. The
investor would ignore this company and start the search for another company whose stock is priced at a
discount to the fair value.
If an investment decision goes wrong, then the risk of suffering losses, is much more in growth investing,
as it does not focus on the current valuation of the stock price. If a company selected by growth investing
approach does not grow as 	expected or its growth slows down a 	bit, the stock market will 	punish its stock.
In such a case, the stock prices will fall very fast and the investor might lose a lot of her invested capital.
However, in the case of companies selected by value investing, if the stock market does not realize the
discount available in the stock of a company soon, then its stock price might not increase in the 	short term.
However, it would provide the investor with an opportunity to accumulate more stocks of this company.
Thus value investing approach has a higher "Margin of 	Safety" as described by Benjamin Graham.
It is said that the 	market may keep ignoring the discount available on a 	stock for a very long time. Therefore,
stock investing should have a very long-term investment horizon. It is similar to an investment in family
land or real estate. You do not sell 	the land or property for every day-to-day financial need. Similarly, it is

-- 11 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
11 |	11 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
recommended not to sell stocks for day-to-day financial requirements and look at them from a very long-
term perspective preferably in decades.
We have discussed the major approaches to stock picking. We have also seen comparative features of
different stock picking approaches. It was mentioned in the beginning of this chapter that every investor
should choose an approach or a mix of approaches, which she likes. After reading books of various
successful investors, who had followed different stock picking approaches mentioned above and after a
personal experience of about 8 years of investing in Indian stock markets, I have found the 	following mix
of stock picking approaches, which I like:
Fundamental Analysis:	Fundamental Analysis:
As previously mentioned, I prefer 	fundamental analysis for stock picking as compared 	to technical analysis.
I like fundamental analysis because it treats an investor as an owner of the company and the fundamental
investor needs to make only a few right investment decisions in her life to make significant wealth as
compared to a technical investor. On the other hand, the technical investor needs to be on the lookout for
right stocks almost daily.
Bottom Up approach:	Bottom Up approach:
I prefer bottom up approach as compared to a top-down approach. If an investor follows a top-down
approach, she would find that the stocks of the companies, which are expected to do good in high growth
industries of such economies (countries), which are expected to outperform other economies, are already
overpriced. This limits the choice of stocks available for 	her investments unless she decides to overpay for
them. In the 	bottom-up approach, the investor focuses on the good companies irrespective of the industries
and economies. Therefore, she is able to select stocks of good performing companies from all 	the industries
whether these industries are growing at a fast or at a slow pace. If 	the investor follows a bottom-up approach
to stock picking, she would have better chances 	of finding out companies, which are growing at 	a fast pace
but whose stocks are priced 	at a discount currently.
A mix of	A mix of 	Growth Investing and Value Investing approach to Fundamental Analysis:	Growth Investing and Value Investing approach to Fundamental Analysis:
I follow a mix of growth and value investing approaches. I search for companies, which have grown their
earnings at a good pace in past and their earnings are expected to keep growing in future. Once I have
prepared a list of such high growth companies, I try to find out the companies from this list, whose stocks
are currently selling at a discount in the market. This is like having best of the both worlds and many readers
might think that it won't be easy 	to find such companies.
However, Indian stock markets are under-penetrated and only a 	few well-known stocks are well researched	
by market 	analysts. Most 	of the 	large investors 	like FIIs, 	mutual funds 	etc. focus 	on only 	about 400-500
stocks of large companies out of 	more than 5,000 companies listed on 	Indian stock exchanges. An investor
can find the hidden gems among these balance 4,500 stocks, which are not 	getting analyzed by stock market

-- 12 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
12 |	12 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
analysts. These hidden gems offer 	an opportunity to invest in high growing companies, which are 	available
at very reasonable stock prices. I focus on this under-analyzed segment of Indian stock markets to find
potential stocks for my 	portfolio.
Thus to summarize, I 	follow a bottom-up fundamental analysis approach in 	which I look for high 	growing
companies available at attractive stock prices.
Any person who wants to be an investor can learn about these approaches for stock picking. The investor
can focus on the approaches which she finds suitable for her according to her temperament, work schedule,
lifestyle etc. The investor can choose to pick the best of the characteristics of various stock picking
approaches and mix them to create an approach of her own.
Once the investor has 	decided about her stock picking approach, she 	should start searching for companies
whose stocks meet her criteria. The investor should keep on improvising her approach by incorporating
lessons, which she would learn from further readings and personal experiences in stock picking.
At the start of Warren Buffett's investing career, no one could tell whether 	he would be the most successful
investor of all times. No one could predict the success of Benjamin Graham, Peter Lynch or Phil Fisher.
Similarly, no one knows whether you and 	I are going to become 	successful & wealthy investors. However,
the current requirement is to put in the necessary effort in stock picking and wait for the future to unfold
the results. Various investors have become successful in the past. I believe that I can 	be successful at stock
picking and so can be anyone else who is willing 	to put in the required effort.

-- 13 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
13 |	13 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
I started investing in stock markets in 2006 by 	learning technical analysis, which I continued to follow for
2 years until I realized 	that I was going in a 	wrong direction. It took a few 	huge lost opportunities, a lot of
introspection, some unlearning and a lot of new learning before I realized that fundamental analysis is the
direction that I should follow.
Since that day, I had never found any occasion to doubt my approach. Fundamental investing was the
approach; I should have followed since the beginning. However, better late than never and I could finally
start my dream journey to financial independence (like Jim Rogers).
Two books from Dr. Elder Alexander, 	a psychiatrist turned stocks trader from the USA, 	laid the foundation
of my stock market investing journey:
1. 	Trading For A Living and
2. 	Come Into My Trading Room
Both are excellent books that I always 	recommend to anyone who wishes to learn 	technical analysis.
I read them in 	detail and learned about many technical indicators. I found the 	sources where I could get the
charts for doing technical analysis of Indian stocks. I ended up downloading the historical data of all the
stocks being traded on Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) and National Stock Exchange (NSE) on my
computer. I spent countless hours finding stocks where charts could tell me when the next breakout ( a
sudden rise in stock price) is going to happen. Lucky enough, I could find quite a few of them.
I started buying stocks near their support levels and selling them near their resistances. I remember the
excellent calls I took in Nicholas Piramal India Ltd:

-- 14 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
14 |	14 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Not all decisions were right like Nicholas Piramal. Some went downhill 	as well, however, I could still save
on losses by increasing positions at some luckily good times. See 	Larsen & Toubro Ltd (L&T):

-- 15 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
15 |	15 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Life was going on fine. I was making money in some trades and losing in some of them. However, I got the
shock of my life 	when I accidentally revisited L&T in November 2007. Oh My God! 	The stock was trading
at 	₹4,500. Three times from where I had sold it in March 2007.
I was dumbstruck. I stood staring at this chart feeling like a fool. 	Here was a stock, which I had in 	my hands
at 	₹1,500 and within 8 months, it had given 200% returns. That is an IRR of 420%! With my eyes popping
on the screen, I had no answer to give myself. I could never have captured this rise from 1,500 to 4,500 by
technical analysis.
Every tiny rise and fall on the stock line in the chart gives a buy or sell signal in technical analysis. There
are more than 50 of them in the above chart over 8 months. I needed to get all of them right, to travel the
journey from 1,500 to 4,500. This 	required an accuracy of better than six-sigma. To top it all, the meteoric
rise of 50% from 3,000 	to 4,500 levels within 10 trading days put the 	final nail.
In technical analysis, I had been keeping stop losses and target prices in mind. These rarely lie beyond a
few percentage points from the purchase price. How on earth could I have captured this gigantic rise in a
trade? I would have sold the stock much earlier, the day I got 5 or 10% return.
Something was not right. Whatever I was doing, I was missing something. Something that was very
important! I had spent months reading authentic books about technical investing. I had 	followed all advice
of Dr. Elder Alexander, 	diligently. Then what was 	I missing?
Lucky for me, then, I came to know about fundamental analysis. Benjamin Graham was the God of this
field and The Intelligent Investor, its bible. I spent weeks going through this book. Every day of reading

-- 16 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
16 |	16 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
felt like an enlightenment. Why did I not 	come to know about this person before! I 	started to find answers
to all my questions. I came to know what I was missing. I was a value investor gone astray.
All that was needed to capture the fabulous rise of L&T was 	– 	“Sit tight and 	do nothing”! Find a good stock
and stay invested. It was this simple!
Armed with this new knowledge, I 	sat foot in 	the world of value investing. I started 	studying fundamentals
of all the stocks I came across. 	Low P/E was the key. Never to buy beyond P/E*P/B of 22.5 	was the mantra
(the gospel of Ben Graham).
I realized that Indian stock markets are full of gems for value investors. It was mid-2008 and Lehman was	about to crash. Almost every stock was available very cheap. I chose three stocks for myself: JK Lakshmi
Cement Limited, Allahabad Bank Limited and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL). Buy
right and sit tight, was my new 	mantra. Graham had now taught me 	not to lose heart in falling market.
In August 2008, I bought JK 	Lakshmi at 	₹80. Within a month, Lehman crashed. The entire world crashed
with it. JK Lakshmi was seen trading at 	₹32. However, with full faith in Graham, who had survived The
Great Depression (1929-32), I dug my heels 	in. The prices kept on 	falling and I kept on 	buying.
Graham had said that all gloom would finally end. The Intelligent Investor, though written in 1949, has
stood the test of time. In March 2009, the markets started to rise. I was holding JK Lakshmi at 	₹55.
The prices started rising and my losses kept on narrowing. In just over a month, I was at breakeven. I told
myself to hold my emotions and not to do the same mistake twice (remember L&T!).

-- 17 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
17 |	17 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
This time, I could capture all the gains that I had missed 2 years back in L&T including the meteoric rise
of 80% in 21 trading days. The only thing different from last time was that this time I was following
fundamental analysis instead of technical analysis.
The price rise did not stop at that, I sold JK Lakshmi at 	₹138 (split adjusted) in December 2009. I sold it
not because I did not like the stock or wanted to book profits, but because I needed money for some personal
purpose.
With fundamental analysis, my learning cycle was complete. I had found what I wanted 	to follow in stock
markets. Since then, I am a fundamental investor following value investing.
Technical analysis keeps an investor on a treadmill. You can never 	relax. Carrying open positions requires
guts. No one knows how markets are going to open up or end at any day. Fundamental investors sleep
peacefully at night.
Technical analysts rarely capitalize on big moves. There is so much noise in indicators, everyone giving
either buy or sell signal all the time. In fundamental investing, you buy once and sit tight. It lets the large
gains come to you. I feel safe to say that an investor nibbles in technical analysis whereas she grabs a big
bite in fundamental analysis.
In technical investing you need to get most of your decision right (>50%) before you make some money.
Significant money is required to cover the cost of the 	live data feed, brokerages and losses of wrong trades.
In fundamental investing even 10 stocks chosen well over one’s lifetime can make one millionaire. Warren	Buffett is a live 	example. He found Coca-Cola, Gillette, Wells 	Fargo, Washington Post and stayed invested
with them.
Technical analysis is more time consuming. An investor has to continuously keep updating the charts and
analyzing new patterns, which keep on appearing, whereas in fundamental analysis, once a quarter reviews
seem sufficient.
I believe that fundamental analysis is ideally suited for any investor who has a daytime job and wants to
generate wealth by investing in stock markets. I have tested both the waters and 	I do not think that I would
ever want to turn back 	to technical investing.

-- 18 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
18 |	18 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
As per Bombay Stock Exchange website, at September 14, 2014, there are 5,471 stocks available for
investing. Each of these stocks represents a company running a unique business. The business of each of
these companies is different from all the other companies whether they are from the same or different
industries.
For example, a pharmaceutical company will have a business entirely different from a telecom company.
Moreover, within the pharmaceutical companies, a company selling its products in the Indian market will
have a very different business from another company, which sells its products in overseas markets. Among
pharmaceutical companies, 	which focus on overseas markets, a company, which sells its 	products in US &
other developed countries will have a different business than the company, which sells its 	products in Africa
& other developing countries. Therefore, investing in any company will expose an investor to a business
that would be very different from investing in 	any other company.
Therefore, investing in stocks of one company will produce very different results than investing in stocks
of any other company. Therefore, it is suggested that an investor must be very particular about choosing
the companies in which she invests her 	hard-earned money.
An investor should analyze a company in detail before adding it to her portfolio. However, it is 	very difficult
for any investor to analyze all the companies available for investment. Their number stands at 5,471 today
and is expected to increase in future. Therefore, 	every investor should use a process for filtering out all the
companies that do not meet her requirements. She should then focus on the remaining companies to find
out the companies, which she feels are the best. Such companies will prove to be great investment
opportunities for her.
The process of shortlisting companies is necessary so that an investor can focus her limited time and effort
on a few 	targeted companies. Shortlisting companies before analysis helps an investor get maximum benefit
out of her effort.
There are many different methods used by investors to shortlist companies for analysis. Some of the
common methods are described below:
 	Magazines	Magazines: There are many magazines that 	are focused on stock markets e.g. Dalal Street, 	Capital
Markets etc. These magazines regularly publish many articles 	with a basic 	analysis of companies.
If an investor reads these magazines regularly, she can select the companies mentioned in these
magazines, which she likes, for detailed analysis. However, an investor should not invest in any
company just because it is recommended by these magazines. These magazines should serve
merely as a source to select stocks for detailed analysis. The final decision should always be based
on investor’s own analysis.

-- 19 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
19 |	19 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
 	Newspapers	Newspapers: 	Similar to magazines, many newspapers have business sections and publish stories
about different companies. If an investor likes any company based on a news article, she should
analyze it further in detail, before 	making an investment decision.
 	Television	Television: Many TV channels have special 	programs, which give coverage to growing companies.
Such programs present a good 	analysis of company’s history, its brands, its customers etc. They
also feature interviews with the company’s management. These programs can be a 	good source of
information for selecting companies for detailed analysis.
However, all these methods, which use mainstream media to shortlist companies have a limitation.
Mainstream media usually covers those companies, which are famous and the market has already
recognized the value of their stocks. Therefore, stocks of such companies usually sell at a premium and
potential for the future price increase is generally limited.
Therefore, many investors try to use sources where they can find companies, which have the potential for
high growth in their business and whose stocks are not yet recognized by the markets. Some of such
methods are mentioned below:
 	Local Marketplace	Local Marketplace: Many investors try to find companies suitable for investment by focusing on
bestselling products in 	the local 	markets. They 	visit malls, 	shops etc. 	to 	find out 	about the 	most
selling products and the shops that sell them. One of the successful investors, Peter Lynch, has
written that he had taken many investment ideas by observing the products bought by his wife 	and
children. If an investor decides to follow this approach, she should find out whether the companies,
which make the highly demanded products, are available for investment on any stock exchange. If
yes, then she should analyze these companies in detail. This approach is best for identifying
companies in consumer goods industries.

Online Stock Screeners	Online Stock Screeners: Stock screeners are tools provided by different websites, which allow	investors to search for companies that meet their investment criteria. Once an investor mentions
her stock picking criteria, these websites show her a list of companies meeting her search criteria.
Then, the investor can analyze these 	companies further. An investor should select her stock picking
criteria based on the investment approach that she finds suitable to her as detailed earlier in this
book.
I follow a 	bottom-up fundamental analysis approach in which I look for high 	growing companies available
at attractive stock prices. After reading books of successful investors and based on personal experience in
stock investing, I have prepared a list of stock picking criteria. These criteria can be used with the stock
screening tools of different websites. These 	criteria help me in 	shortlisting companies for detailed analysis,
which are growing fast but are yet to become famous.
I am confident that at the end of this book, all the readers would be able to make their own stock picking
criteria, which would help them select stocks based on their stock-picking approach. Such criteria would
reflect the personal approach of every 	reader and will help her 	proceed on her stock investing journey.

-- 20 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
20 |	20 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Once an investor has formed her 	stock picking criteria, all she needs is a tool for searching companies based
on these criteria. Now 	a day, there are many websites, which offer online tools 	to investors for shortlisting
companies based on their criteria. These websites are 	paid as well as free 	ones:
 	Paid Websites	Paid Websites: E.g. CMIE, Capitaline. These paid websites charge an annual fee of a few lakh
rupees for providing their services.

Free Websites	Free Websites: E.g. screener.in, equitymaster.com, askkuber.com
Paid websites offer more features than the free websites. However, an investor should consider paid
websites only if she has a very large 	portfolio. Free websites are good enough to meet analysis requirements
of an individual investor. I believe that 	if an investor's portfolio is smaller than 	₹10 cr, then she 	should not
use paid websites, as annual charges 	of paid websites would be a significant cost to 	her portfolio.
My favorite online stock screening tool is www.screener.in. It is a very simple to use website. It has very
elaborate instructions for helping the first time uses.
I have given below 	a few screenshots demonstrating the step-by-step approach for using its stock screener.
I have used a 	sample set of stock picking criteria for this demonstration.
In the above screen, I have searched for companies where:

-- 21 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
21 |	21 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
1. 	Sales have grown by a compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of 15% for last 10 years.
2. 	Price to earnings ratio is less than 	10
3. 	Debt to Equity ratio is less than 1
4. 	Cash generated from operation is positive and
5. 	Market capitalization is greater than 	₹25 cr.
Once an investor clicks on “Run this screen”, the website will provide her with a list of companies whose
stocks meet the criteria specified above.
One can see that 	there are 56 companies out 	of the total 5,471 companies, which meet 	the sample shortlisting
criteria. Now an investor can focus her time & effort on analysis of these 56 companies and ignore the
balance 5,415 companies.
An investor can click on each company's name to find out more details about each company in the search
results.
Company Snapshot:	Company Snapshot:

-- 22 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
22 |	22 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Profit & Loss details for last 10 years:	Profit & Loss details for last 10 years:

-- 23 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
23 |	23 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Balance Sheet details for last 10 years:	Balance Sheet details for last 10 years:
Cash flows details for last 10	Cash flows details for last 10 	years:	years:

-- 24 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
24 |	24 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Thus, we can see that now a day, some very useful tools for information on stocks & companies are
available to every investor. Stock selection is no longer a field reserved for only a few big investors. Any
common investor, including you and me, can search for 	great companies and analyze them in detail.
In the current era, 	to become a successful investor, all we 	need is the right approach towards stock investing,
some amount of hard 	work and an internet connection!

-- 25 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
25 |	25 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The current chapter aims to provide a framework for the detailed analysis of any stock before we delve
deep into the threadbare analysis of any 	company for making investment decision about its stock.
It is said that there 	is no single path to success. Similarly, there is 	no single defined way of analysis to find
a good company. Investors can analyze a company in many different ways depending upon their stock
picking approach.
An investor, who follows technical analysis, would study past stock price & volume data and various
indicators derived from this data on charting software. Her analysis would focus on finding stocks whose
charts show a defined pattern where she can predict future price and make buying/short-selling decisions
about the stock accordingly. Her aim is to find a company whose stock is set for a rise/fall in near future.
An investor, who follows growth investing approach of fundamental analysis, would like to study a
company 	like 	an 	entrepreneur. 	She 	would 	focus 	on 	a 	company’s 	product, 	target 	market, 	suppliers,
customers, management, financials etc. She would want to know the strength and sustainability of the
business of 	a company. 	Her aim 	is to 	find a 	company that is 	going to increase 	its earnings in 	future. Her
belief 	is 	that 	when 	a 	company 	increases 	its 	earnings, 	the 	demand 	for 	its 	stock 	will 	increase. 	Increasing
demand for the stock would lead to increase in the price of the stock of the company. The investor would
gain from an increase in stock price as well as dividends to be received from the company in future.
She focuses on finding companies, which have a sustainable business advantage, which can last for decades
so that she need not shift out of the stock of a company every few days. She thinks like the owner of the
company and remains invested in it 	for decades.
An investor, who follows the value-investing approach of fundamental analysis, would focus on finding
fair value of the company. She would focus on the assets and earning potential of the companies. She tries
to find out the companies whose stocks are priced at a discount to the fair value. The deeper the discount
she can find, the better it is!

-- 26 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
26 |	26 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
I follow a bottom-up fundamental analysis approach in which I look for high growth companies whose
stocks are available at attractive prices. I focus on finding companies, which have grown their sales &
profits at 	a good 	pace in 	past and 	have the business strength to 	keep growing in 	future. I 	look for 	companies,
which have low debt as it 	offers safety & a potential future route to 	raise funds. I try to 	find out companies
whose stock is selling at low valuations so that it can offer a huge margin of safety. I believe that if earnings
of a company increase then stock price would also rise. However, no one knows the timing of stock price
rise and this is the uncertainty/risk, which requires the patience of staying put with good stocks. The
patience of staying invested in good companies is 	rewarded handsomely.
I divide the analysis of any company in four sections: Financial Analysis, Business & Industry Analysis,
Valuation Analysis and Management Analysis.
There is no particular order in which an investor should approach these sections. One may start from
financial analysis or management analysis. However, all the 	four sections are essential and none 	can be left
unanalyzed.
The aim of financial analysis is to 	analyse the amount of income it 	earns in sales, the 	amount of profits it is
able to retain for shareholders after factoring in all expenses & taxes and the growth in sales & profits over
past. 	Financial analysis 	also focuses 	on the 	sources of 	funds, which 	a 	company has 	used for 	creating its
assets. It also involves the analysis of 	the amount of cash it 	generates from its operations and utilization of
this cash, whether for investments or debt repayment etc. The aim is to find companies, which have a
healthy financial position that can offer the potential for future growth.
The financial analysis involves the reading of annual reports of a company. It comprises of a detailed
analysis of three main financial statements:
This section of financials provides details of total income that 	a company has earned 	in a year (also called
Topline). It provides details of all the expenses the company has incurred to 	earn the topline. It also 	provides
details of the taxes the company paid to the govt. authorities. The part of topline, which remains after
meeting all the expenses and taxes, is 	called net profit or bottom-line.
I focus on companies which earn a lot of money (topline), use minimum amount to earn that money, pay
due amount of taxes 	on its profits and increase the sales (topline) & earnings (bottom-line) year on year.

-- 27 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
27 |	27 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
This section of financials provides details of all the assets and liabilities of a company at the last date of the
financial year. In the Indian context, it provides details at March 31 of any given year.
Liabilities are the sources of funds, which a company has utilized to purchase all the assets it owns. The
usual sources are shareholder’s own money (equity), retained earnings (profits earned bu	t not distributed to
shareholders) and debt (borrowings from banks and other sources)
Assets provide details of utilization of the money raised under liabilities. Assets comprise of fixed assets,
investments and current assets. Fixed assets are permanent fixtures that generate revenue year after 	year for	
the company e.g. plant & machinery. Investments reflect the money that the company has invested in
different other companies, joint venture, subsidiaries etc. which are expected to earn money for company’s
shareholders. Current assets are usually consumed within next one year. Current assets include inventory
that gets consumed and gets sold as 	finished product within a year, cash & 	similar investments kept by the
company to meet day to day requirements and money due from customers (account receivables or debtors)
and loans given to different parties that are 	expected to be received back within a 	year).
I focus on companies, which use the minimum amount of debt and create assets that keep on generating
revenue for the company year 	after year without the need of frequent expenses to maintain these assets.
This section provides details of the cash that a company has 	generated in last financial year from operation
(cash-flow from operations or CFO). 	This section also includes details of cash 	used in making investments
or received from selling investments (cash-flow from investing activities or CFI) and cash raised from
financial institutions as borrowings or repaid to them during the last year (cash-flow from financing	
activities or CFF)
I focus on companies, which generate a good amount of cash flow from operations that can take care of
their requirements of investment (CFI) and repayment of debt (CFF). If a 	company generates so much cash
that after taking care of CFI and CFF, it still has a surplus left, it is a dream company and I buy as many
stocks as I can (Shop till you drop!!).
Some knowledge of accounting can be a good advantage to do the financial analysis of a company.
However, it is not required to be a 	master of accounting for stock investing. An investor who does not have
a background in finance & accounting, but is 	willing to put in the effort needed to read 	the annual reports,
will get the required knowledge of accounting during analysis. Therefore, I firmly believe that anyone
irrespective of educational background can be a 	great stock picker.
I am a bottom-up fundamental investor. Therefore, I give more weight to the business qualities of a
company than the industry it operates in. In fact, I follow Peter Lynch when he says that:

-- 28 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
28 |	28 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Moderately 	fast 	growers 	(20 	to 	25 	percent) 	in 	non-growth 	industries 	are 	ideal
investments.
I try to find a company, which has shown good growth of sales & profits in past years. I consider such a
company a good investment candidate irrespective of its industry. I try to focus on the performance of the
company in comparison to its industry peers and try to find out if it has any business advantage over its
peers.
Warren Buffett calls this business advantage “Moat”. Many investors visit company stores, manufactur	ing
plants, meet its customers, suppliers, and 	vendors etc. to find out 	the moat of 	a company. If time 	permits,
an investor should do these activities, as these will give her information that the stock markets are yet to	
come across. However, many individual investors including me, have limited time left after the daytime
job and therefore, cannot go to the 	market and 	meet different stakeholders of 	the company. 	Therefore, I use
consistent growth in sales in past as a substitute for market research and try to analyse it further. If I find a
company has been growing at a rate of 20% year on year for past 10 years whereas its peers are growing
only at 10% or less, I analyse it further. If 10 year back it had a single manufacturing plant and it has
increased its capacity to 5-6 plants now where it is able to 	sell the entire production of these 5-6 plants, then
the company is bound to have a sustainable advantage “Moat”.
The moat can be 	discovered after doing market research if time permits but detailed analysis of past growth,
other financial parameters like higher profit margins as compared to industry peers, can easily provide an
investor with the indication of a sustainable business advantage.
We have the advantage of witnessing one of the most severe recessions ever since 2008. It is blessing in
disguise as we can 	analyse the performance of any 	company during this recession and see 	how its business
fared. If it was able to show sustained growth during 2008-2014, it is expected to have a good business
advantage, which has sustained it in bad times and it might help it to grow its business further when good
times (Achche Din) arrive!
Management is the most important parameters and I give it more importance than any other parameter. I
want to invest in companies, which are 	run by honest people whom I can 	trust with my personal money. A
crook manager will always find more than one way to cheat shareholders. I avoid companies where I see
even the slightest sign of compromise of integrity.
Management analysis is mainly a subjective exercise, however; it contains some objective parameters as
well. We should read the profile of the promoters, search about their credentials, any issues, penalties,
regulatory actions etc. about them from public sources (e.g. google). We should do similar checks about
independent directors as well. Once we are convinced that there is nothing to question their character &
integrity then we should move ahead with further analysis.
As an investor should stay invested in stocks of a company for decades, management succession plans
become a vital factor. As 	in India, most businesses run in families, we should 	see whether 	the key 	promoter

-- 29 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
29 |	29 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
has introduced her next generation into business. We should read 	about the next generation. We 	should find
out their education credentials and the amount of experience they have already had working under the
guidance of their parents.
Certain parameters like salary being paid to children of the key promoter are a good indicator of values
being instilled by promoters 	in her 	children. I was 	amazed to 	find a 	company, which made 	about 	₹50 cr.
(₹500 million) in profits but the promoter paid only 	₹10,000/- (₹0.01 million) per month to his daughter
who had joined the board of 	directors. Today, I am heavily invested in 	the stocks of that company.
For any further information, we should always call the company secretary or investor’s relations officer of
the company before we commit our 	hard-earned money to any stock.
Many objective parameters can provide indications about investor-friendliness of the promoters &
management:
A comparative analysis of salary drawn by promoters and the profits of a company is a good parameter.
The promoter should not have a history of seeking an increase in remuneration when the profits of the
company declined in past.
Successful execution of increase of production capacity, especially by green field plants, is 	a good indicator
of competent management. It is very good if the 	capacity addition has been done without facing any delays.
A company that has consistently increased its dividend payout with an increase in profits in past usually
has a good management.
Purchase of shares of a company by its promoters is a sign of a 	good promoter. However, selling of shares
by 	promoters is not necessarily negative. Company’s shares are usually promoter’s biggest asset and they
usually sell it whenever any cash requirement arises in personal life.
There are many parameters, which need to be studied to analyse the valuation levels of a company. Some
of the important parameters are:
I believe that P/E is the single most important parameter to analyse whether the stock of any company is
overvalued or undervalued at any point in time. 	It is calculated by dividing the current market 	price (CMP)
of a stock by profit/earnings per share (EPS). It represents the price an investor pays to buy 	₹1 of earnings.
I prefer the companies, which are available at low P/E ratio, preferably less than 10.
It is calculated by dividing the CMP of a stock with the book value (shareholder’s equity + retained
earnings) per share. It represents the price an investor pays for 	₹1 of net assets after settling all outside

-- 30 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
30 |	30 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
liabilities of a company. I find P/B ratio irrelevant due to the usage of the 	historical 	cost of company’s assets
while calculating book value. The historical cost might not represent the current market value of company’s
assets. However, P/B ratio is very important for companies in the financial sector where most of the assets
are cash assets and book value is a good indicator of the net worth of the company.
Benjamin Graham said that an investor should look for companies where P/E * P/B is < 22.5. However, I
focus mainly on companies with P/E <10 	while ignoring P/B ratio.
Every investor develops her own parameters as her investing experience grows and I believe that every
reader of this blog would be able to find her favorite parameter as she keeps analyzing more and more
companies.
It represents the value of all the shares of 	a company and indicates the value for which the entire company
can be bought at any point in time. Companies are divided into micro-cap, small-cap, mid-cap and large-
cap based on their 	market capitalization. I prefer investing in companies, which are 	currently micro-cap or
small-caps as these companies represent the section of the economy, which can grow fast and become future
large-caps.
There are many other 	parameters like return on equity (ROE), return on capital employed (ROCE), dividend
yield etc. which are analysed by different investors to find out stocks which hold the potential for 	providing
good returns in future. We would analyse many such 	factors in the subsequent chapters in this book, which
focus on the valuation analysis.
In the current chapter, we discussed various aspects of the analysis of any company. An investor should
analyse the companies from each 	of these angles: financial, business & industry, management and 	valuation	before she invests her hard-earned money in any stock.
The investor should realize that her rejection rate of stocks would always be 	high as good companies selling
at attractive prices are always difficult to find. However, finding one good stock each year is more than
sufficient. 10 good stocks in one’s lifetime can make one a billionaire. The investor should never be in a
hurry. She should learn to be patient and should hold the impulse to buy a stock if she does not find a 	good
stock.
The investor should have very strict stock selection criteria for adding stocks in her portfolio so that she
can be confident that only right stocks are selected. Easy selection criteria will lead to many undesirable
stocks in the portfolio, which will require selling soon after 	buying. This would lead to wastage of time and
effort put in stock selection. The key is to find if the company would survive for next 25-30 years and
whether the investor can visualize it being there after many decades. Economic cycles of upturn and
downturn will be there. A good company can weather all of them and come out a winner.

-- 31 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
31 |	31 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
At the end of each financial year, every company is required by law to prepare a report for shareholders,
which provides the details of the performance of the company over the year. This report is called annual
report. The annual report is the 	single most important source of information for an investor. The 	importance
of annual report to an 	investor is akin to alphabets for any language or 	periodic table for Chemistry.
The detailed analysis of any company starts with reading of the annual report of 	the company. I believe that
if an investor does not read annual reports of companies, she would not be able to become a successful
investor.
An individual investor can get annual reports of any company from multiple sources. These sources are
free as well as paid sources.
Free sources are sufficient for most of the requirements of any individual investor. 	Some of the common
sources are:
This is the most common source and should be the first place to look for information about any company.
Many companies provide annual reports for almost 10-12 years on their website. Below is the screenshot
of investor’s section on 	the website of Larsen & Toubro Ltd, which provides annual reports from 2002
onwards.
However, there are many companies, which do not publish annual reports on their websites. For example
Mayur Uniquoters Ltd (MUL) does not have links for annual reports at its website.
Most of the companies, which lack annual reports on their websites, are small-cap and 	mid-cap companies,
which are yet to have an investor friendly interface. As these companies grow in size, they start investing
in public relations & investor-friendly initiatives and improve significantly in the dissemination of
information. Therefore, the absence of 	annual reports on the website should not 	be seen negatively. It should
be accepted 	merely 	as a 	phase 	in company’s life 	cycle. 	There 	are many other public sources from 	where we
can get the required information. Some 	of such sources are mentioned below.
Stock exchanges are an 	important source of information distribution for companies. Many stock exchanges
around the world host much more information, financial and otherwise, about companies than mere press
releases and corporate announcements. In India, 	Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE www.bseindia.com) is one
such stock exchange, which provides annual reports as 	well as financial results of the 	companies listed on
BSE:

-- 32 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
32 |	32 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
As we can see above, the annual reports of MUL are available on the website of BSE. Therefore, an
individual investor can get the annual reports of the companies that 	do not provide annual reports on their
websites, from websites of stock exchanges.
Many financial websites also provide annual reports of companies. 	e.g. 	www.moneycontorl.com.
The sources mentioned above are free sources available to any investor. Free sources of financial
information are sufficient for most of the requirement of individual investors. However, there are many
paid sources as well that can provide the annual reports to investors. Some of such sources are:
 	http://www.reportjunction.com/
 	http://www.report.capitaline.com/
The annual report provides a yearly account of the performance of a company. We should read the annual
report of a company with same vigor be it when analyzing it for investment for the first time or when
monitoring it as part of our portfolio. While analyzing companies for the first time investment, I prefer
reading annual reports going back as far as possible, preferably for last 10 years or more.

-- 33 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
33 |	33 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Annual report contains financial as well as non-financial information about the company. Both financial
and non-financial information are equally important 	for investors.
The annual report is a yearly occasion when owners/managers communicate with the shareholders and
inform them about the vision of the company, its performance during past year, its achievements, hurdles
& challenges being faced, steps taken to 	overcome such hurdles, the status of 	past expansion plans & other	
projects undertaken by the company etc.
Many promoters take this opportunity very seriously and inform the shareholders about the company and
their philosophy in such details that their communications become a collector’s affair. W	arren Buffett is
one such person. His letters to shareholders of 	Berkshire Hathaway as part of the 	annual report are read by
investors world over. 	I would suggest that every person who wishes to be a successful investor in the stock
market should read all his letters.
The communication of a company’s management to its shareholders is a very important source for judging
the status of the company as well 	as the industry. In fact, whenever I want 	to know about the status of any
industry, I read the annual report of any company belonging to that industry. One reading of management’s
communication and the Management Discussion & Analysis (MDA) section would give an investor an
authentic brief snapshot about the industry and the company.
In this section, the directors as representatives of shareholders intimate them about the financial
performance 	of the company 	during 	past year, the 	status 	of projects under 	implementation, 	major 	customers,
status of conversion of new customers, other 	major initiatives taken by the company.
We should analyse the current performance of the 	company by comparing it with the outlook presented by
directors in past years in the annual report. Special focus should be on the projects under implementation.
We should check whether the company is able to finish projects on time and whether the company has
abandoned projects midway.
I have provided below a 	snapshot of the director's report from the 	FY2013 annual report of MUL.

-- 34 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
34 |	34 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
MDA is another important section where management informs the shareholders about the business
environment being faced by the company. The management informs the shareholders about the industry

-- 35 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
35 |	35 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
outlook, company outlook, opportunities, challenges, risks, updates on research & development, human
resources etc. A snapshot of the 	MDA from the FY2013 annual report 	of MUL is provided:
The annual report provides details qualification of all 	the directors, key management people 	responsible for
decisions of the company. It provides details of employees who are being paid in excess of 	₹60 lakh (₹6.0
million) per annum in the annexure 	to director’s report and disclosures. Below screenshot provides details
of salaries of most of 	the directors including promoter-directors of MUL for FY2013:

-- 36 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
36 |	36 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We get to know about the salary being drawn by most of the promoter directors in this section. We can
analyze whether salary drawn is in 	line with the industry norms/profits of the company.
In case of a company, Ambika Cotton Mills Ltd (ACML), I was 	surprised to see that the salary being drawn
by promoter-chairman & managing director (CMD) was 	₹75 lakh (₹7.5 million) per annum and the salary
of his daughter who was working as 	executive director was 	₹1.5 lakh (₹0.15 million) per annum.
In FY2013, ACML had reported sales of 	₹400 crore (₹4,000.0 million) and a net profit of 	₹31 crore (₹310.0
million). Salary being drawn by the promoter’s daughter was mere₹12,500 per month, which is equal to
any lowest level employee of any government organization in India. The 	screenshot from the annual report
of ACML for FY2013 showing salaries of Mr. 	Chandran (promoter-CMD) and Ms. Bhavya (his daughter,
executive director) is given below:
This section contains the details composition of the board of directors, quorum of various committees of
the board, attendance record of 	various directors in different meetings, details of 	past and upcoming annual
general meetings, information of listing on various exchanges, past dividend record, proposed dividend,
stock market data, distribution of shares etc. It also contains details of registrar & transfer agent of the
company.
This would contain the information about the upcoming AGM as well as different decisions that require
shareholder’s ascent by way of a vote. We get toknow of salary hike sought by promoter managers, plans
of taking further debt, new expansion projects, and entry of next generation of leaders in board positions
etc. by the items listed to be voted in AGM.

-- 37 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
37 |	37 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The annual report contains almost entire financial data that an investor needs to form her views about the
company:
The financial section starts with the report of an independent auditor in which an independent entity
provides 	its 	views 	about 	the financial information presented in the annual report. Auditor’s report comments
on the key items like any deviation from the accepted accounting practices, any amounts that are not paid
to government authorities, any default in payments to lenders, sufficiency of control systems to the size of	the company, any frauds conducted by company or its employees, proper utilization of funds raised by
company from lenders/IPOs etc.
Auditor’s report gives you a snapshot ofthe authenticity of financial information that follows in the annual
report.
These consist of three important sections: balance sheet, profit and loss statement and cash-flow statement.
Financial statements of the current year are 	always shown in parallel to figures of the previous year 	so that
performance of current year can be compared with immediately preceding 	year.
This section of financials provides details of all the assets and liabilities of a company at the last date of the
financial year. Liabilities are the sources of 	funds, which a company has 	utilized to purchase all the assets
it owns. The balance sheet of MUL at March 31, 2013, is shown below:

-- 38 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
38 |	38 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We can see the 	comparative position of MUL at March 31, 2013, & 	March 31, 2012, and observe the way
the balance sheet size has increased from 	₹15,850.16 lakh (₹1.58 billion) to 	₹21,349.20 lakhs (₹2.13
billion). Almost half of 	the increase of 	₹5,499.04 lakhs (₹0.54 billion) has been contributed by the 	increase
in reserves & surplus by 	₹2,700 lakhs (₹0.27 billion). This is a sign of healthy growth by 	a company.
This section of financials provides details of total sales that a company has achieved in a year and all the
expenses the company has incurred to achieve these sales. The balance after 	expenses and taxes constitutes
the net profit for the 	shareholders. Given below is the P/L statement of MUL 	for FY2013:

-- 39 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
39 |	39 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We can see that total revenue has grown by 20% from 	₹31,909.37 lakh (₹3.19 billion) in FY2012 to
₹38,327.47 lakh (₹3.83 billion) in FY2013. Such revenue growth is very good. On top of 	it, we can see 	that
in the same period net 	profit has grown by 30% from 	₹3,337.06 lakh (₹0.33 billion) in FY2012 to 	₹4,362.55
lakh (₹0.44 billion) in FY2013. This higher growth in net 	profit is an indication of improvement in operating
efficiency of the company.
This section provides details of the cash that a company has 	generated in last financial year from operation
(cash-flow from operations or CFO). 	This section also includes details of cash 	used in making investments
or received from selling investments (cash-flow from investing activities or CFI) and cash raised from
financial institutions as borrowings or repaid to them during the last year (cash-flow from financing
activities or CFF). Given below is the 	cash-flow statement of MUL for FY2013:

-- 40 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
40 |	40 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We can see that in FY2013, MUL generated 	₹2,723.54 lakh (₹0.27 billion) of cash from operations and
raised 	₹766.70 lakh (₹0.07 billion) of cash from financing and used it 	for investing 	₹3,586.26 lakh (₹0.35
billion) in 	assets of 	the company. 	Thus, we 	can observe 	that MUL 	has funded 	most of 	its investments in
FY2013 from its operations (aka internal accruals), which is 	a sign of 	healthy growth.
Schedules contain the detailed breakup of numbers shown in financial statements. They are an integral part
of financial statements and are studied along with financial statements to get a better understanding of
financial statements. For example, if we want to see the 	details of long-term borrowings in the balance sheet
of MUL shown above, we should refer 	to note/schedule no.5 of the annual report of MUL, for more 	details:

-- 41 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
41 |	41 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Thus we get to know the details of the lenders, their respective loan amounts, repayment schedules and the
security offered for different loans availed by 	the company from its lenders.
If we want to see whether MUL has invested in a new plant/assets during the year, then we can see its
details in schedule/note on fixed assets:
We can see that the company has invested 	₹1,493.94 lakh (₹149.3 million) in current year, which was
mainly invested in building & premises and plant & equipment. It indicates that the company is probably

-- 42 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
42 |	42 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
investing in a new manufacturing unit. If we see the 	figures for previous year in the last row, 	then we realize
that last year the company had 	invested 	₹1,772.80 lakh (₹177.2 million) in its 	assets. This gives an 	investor
an indication that the company is in 	the expansion phase and continuously investing in assets.
Schedules/Notes are very important and should be studied with patience and due care. The quality of
schedules is an important reflection of the quality of management of the 	company. Warren Buffett says that
if you are unable to understand the notes, it is because the CEO does not want you to understand them. A
lot of information/financial jugglery is often 	hidden in schedules.
Every company is required to disclose every transaction it enters into with its promoters and other related
entities. A careful analysis of these transactions can reflect whether the promoter is using different
transactions to transfer money from the company to 	itself.
We should look at the transactions between the company and promoter owned entities (POE, enterprises
over which promoters are able 	to exercise significant influence). The presence of 	transactions like interest-
free loans to POE, taking assets owned by POE on lease/purchase at prices higher than market value are
some of the examples by which we can 	get a sense of promoters who are taking out funds from the company
and gaining at the cost 	of minority shareholders.
Thus, we can see that the annual report is one such document that can throw light on the status of the
company, provide information to gauge its potential for future 	growth and provide insight on the character
of the management of the company. It is the single most important document that every investor should
read.

-- 43 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
43 |	43 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Financial analysis it forms the basic backbone and the first filter for selecting stocks for further analysis.
Only the stocks that satisfy the 	criteria of good financial performance should be 	worthy of spending further
time.
The financial analysis consists of studying three paramount sections of the annual report and analyzing
them in detail. These three sections are Balance Sheet (B/S), 	Profit & Loss statement (P&L) and Cash Flow
statement (CF).
Before you begin to 	feel that financial analysis might contain a 	lot of mathematics and difficult calculations,
I want to tell you that the entire financial analysis consists of the study of only two things: Ratios and
Growth rates. As we delve deeper into financial analysis, we would see that it entails reading the annual
reports, noting down some relevant numbers from it and study various ratios of these numbers and their
growth rates over the years.
To further simplify the things, readers would be happy to note that, now a day an investor does not need to
see the financial numbers in the annual report of 	the company and punch in the numbers in a 	data analysis
software like Microsoft Excel (excel). The investor can use free resources on the 	internet, which can provide
readymade data files containing financial details of companies which the investor can use in excel to
perform 	a 	good 	analysis. 	One 	such 	free 	resource 	available 	to 	investors 	in 	Indian 	equity 	markets 	is
www.screener.in
At www.screener.in, the webpage for every 	company has a link stating- 	“Export to Excel”.
You can download the excel file 	of financial data of the company by 	clicking this link.

-- 44 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
44 |	44 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Once ready with the data, doing financial analysis is a breeze. However, if any investor is not verse with
using data analysis software like excel, he can use the calculators to find out the ratios and growth rates.
The result by both means would be the same. However, excel would make the analysis easier to perform.
The first parameter to check is the 	growth of sales that a company has achieved in the 	past. Companies that
have a product or service, which is high in demand usually show high growth of 	sales in past.
Vinati Organics Ltd (VOL) is a world market leader in two of its products. Its products have witnessed
good demand and therefore its sales have 	increased by leaps & bounds in past:
Year	Year 	2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014
Sales (₹Cr.) 	49 	58 	84 	150 	194 	237 	322 	447 	553 	696
Thus we can see that sales of VOL have grown from 	₹49 cr (0.49 	billion) in 2005 to 	₹696 cr (6.96 billion),
which means a compounded average growth rate (CAGR) of 34% over last 10 years. An investor should
prefer companies that have grown at least at a rate of 15% or more in past. One should note that very high	
growth rates of 50% or 	more are unsustainable in long run.
Profitability can be measured by two prominent measures operating profit margin (OPM) and net profit
margin (NPM).
OPM measures the portion of sales income 	that is remaining after deducting costs of producing these sales
e.g. raw material costs, employee costs, sales & marketing costs, power & fuel costs etc. Operating profit
does 	not 	factor 	in 	expenses 	like 	depreciation 	of 	fixed 	assets, 	interest 	and 	tax 	expenses.
NPM 	reflects 	the 	net 	profit 	that 	remains 	after 	a 	company 	has 	paid 	its 	interest, 	tax 	and 	factored 	in
depreciation. Net profit is final remnant after meeting all expenses and is available with the company for
reinvesting or distributing to shareholders as a dividend.
An investor’s aim is to find companies with good profitability, which they have been able to sustain in the
past. Companies with 	high-profit margins are able 	to face 	tough times comfortably and 	still make money
for their shareholders.

-- 45 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
45 |	45 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Let us analyse the profitability of VOL. All figures are in 	₹Cr. (10 million). Some calculations might show
some mismatch because of rounding off.
Year 	2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014
Sales (A)	Sales (A) 	49	49 	58	58 	84	84 	150	150 	194	194 	237	237 	322	322 	447	447 	553	553 	696	696
Operating Profit (B) 	77 	66 	10	10 	29	29 	37	37 	58	58 	70	70 	95	95 	120	120 	153	153
OPM% (B/A)	OPM% (B/A) 	15%	15% 	11%	11% 	12%	12% 	20%	20% 	19%	19% 	24%	24% 	22%	22% 	21%	21% 	22%	22% 	22%	22%
Other 	Income(C) 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	1 	2 	3 	4 	9
EBIDT* 	(D=B+C) 	7 	7 	10 	30 	37 	58 	71 	98 	124 	162
Depreciation 	(E) 	2 	2 	3 	3 	3 	5 	6 	7 	10 	15
Interest 	(F) 	1 	1 	2 	3 	3 	4 	5 	9 	12 	18
Profit 	before 	tax 	(G=D-E-F) 	5 	3 	6 	23 	31 	49 	60 	82 	103 	129
Tax 	(H) 	1 	1 	2 	8 	7 	12 	11 	27 	34 	42
Net profit	Net profit
(I=G-H)	(I=G-H) 	33 	22 	44 	15	15 	25	25 	40	40 	52	52 	55	55 	69	69 	86	86
NPM% (I/A)	NPM% (I/A) 	7%	7% 	3%	3% 	4%	4% 	10%	10% 	13%	13% 	17%	17% 	16%	16% 	12%	12% 	12%	12% 	12%	12%
*EBIDT: Earnings before interest depreciation and taxes
We can see that the OPM for VOL witnessed an increase during period 2005 to 2010 from 15% to 24%
indicating improving the efficiency of operations. Thereafter, the 	company has been sustaining OPM levels
of about 22% since last 5 years, which is a very good sign about operating efficiency of VOL. NPM has
also seen a 	similar trend by initially increasing from 7% to 17% and then 	sustaining at about 12% levels.
A company with good accounting and corporate governance standards would want to pay all legitimate
taxes to the government. In India, the corporate tax rate is 30% for Indian companies and 40% for foreign
companies.
There are many tax 	incentive schemes for different companies/industries/states etc., 	that provide many tax
saving avenues that companies use to 	lower tax expense. Nevertheless, abnormally low tax payouts 	should
raise red flags and must be analysed.
Let us see tax payout histories of VOL. Figures are in ₹
Cr. (10 million). Some calculations might show	some mismatch because of rounding off.

-- 46 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
46 |	46 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Year	Year 	2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014
Profit 	before 	tax 	(A) 	5 	3 	6 	23 	31 	49 	60 	82 	103 	129
Tax 	(B) 	1 	1 	2 	8 	7 	12 	11 	27 	34 	42
Tax% 	(B/A) 	31% 	39% 	35% 	34% 	22% 	24% 	18% 	33% 	33% 	33%
We can see that the company has been paying tax mostly at the rate of corporate tax, which is a healthy
sign. Tax payouts also give a 	glimpse of the management quality and integrity. Hence, we would revisit tax
payouts while discussing management analysis in the subsequent chapters of this book.
Interest coverage gives an indication whether the operating profits generated by the company are sufficient
to pay interest to the lenders for the funds it has borrowed from them. It can be measured by the ratio of
operating profit to interest expense called Interest Coverage Ratio:
Interest Coverage Ratio = Operating Profit /	Interest Coverage Ratio = Operating Profit / 	Interest Expense	Interest Expense
An investor should look out for companies that have interest coverage of at least 3. It implies that they make
an operating profit of at least 	₹3 whereas their interest expense is 	₹1.
Higher interest ratio provides a cushion during bad economic times and the company would not find it
difficult to service its debt even during bad times.
Let us see the interest coverage of VOL. Figures are in 	₹Cr. (10 million). Some calculations might show
some mismatch because of rounding off.
Year 	2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014
Operating Profit (A) 	7 	6 	10 	29 	37 	58 	70 	95 	120 	153
Interest (B) 	1 	1 	2 	3 	3 	4 	5 	9 	12 	18
Interest coverage (A/B) 	7 	6 	5 	9 	11 	14 	16 	10 	10 	9
We can see that VOL has been maintaining an interest coverage ratio of about 10-15 over the years. It
means that VOL would be able 	to service its debt even in 	bad times without much issue.
One important thing to note here is that every 	investor defines these ratios and growth rates as per her own
preference. There is no single defined way of analyzing financial statements.
Warren buffet prefers owner’s earning over net profit. Many investors like 	to include non-operating income
while calculating interest coverage. Nevertheless, I prefer to use only operating income and avoid non-
operating income while calculating interest coverage.
Therefore, the more investors you interact and the more authors you read, 	you would find that everyone has
her own way of 	analyzing financial statements. You should not be bogged down by different formulas used

-- 47 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
47 |	47 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
by different 	investors. You 	should try 	to 	analyze and 	find out 	the 	parameters/ratios that 	differentiate the
companies, which you feel comfortable investing in.
D/E ratio measures the composition of the funds that a company has utilized to buy its assets. Company
uses its assets to produce goods & services that bring the sales revenue to the company. D/E shows how
much of the total funds employed by the company are its own (shareholder’s funds) and how much are
borrowed from other lenders. D/E of 1 means that 50% of funds are brought by shareholders and rest 50%
are borrowed from lenders.
I prefer companies, which have very low debt. During bad times when the company might not be able to
make good profits, lender will ask for their money and 	the company might have to sell its assets in distress
to pay back the lenders. If the company is not able to find buyers willing to pay sufficient money, it can
become bankrupt. Therefore, investors should prefer companies with low debt to 	equity ratio.
Let us see the debt to equity ratio of VOL over time. Figures are in 	₹Cr. (10 million). Some calculations
might show some mismatch because of 	rounding off.
Year 	2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014
Equity 	Share 	Capital 	(1) 	7 	7 	7 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10
Reserves 	(2) 	20 	21 	23 	33 	55 	89 	134 	177 	231 	300
Total shareholder's funds (E=1+2)	Total shareholder's funds (E=1+2) 	26	26 	27	27 	30	30 	43	43 	65	65 	99	99 	144	144 	187	187 	241	241 	310	310
Secured 	Loans 	(3) 	16 	19 	21 	28 	45 	57 	70 	118 	163 	88
Unsecured 	Loans 	(4) 	0 	3 	5 	6 	6 	6 	7 	36 	38 	34
Total debt (D=3+4)	Total debt (D=3+4) 	16	16 	23	23 	26	26 	34	34 	51	51 	63	63 	77	77 	153	153 	201	201 	122	122
D/E	D/E 	0.6	0.6 	0.8	0.8 	0.9	0.9 	0.8	0.8 	0.8	0.8 	0.6	0.6 	0.5	0.5 	0.8	0.8 	0.8	0.8 	0.4	0.4
We can see that VOL has been maintaining D/E less than 1 consistently. D/E increased in 2012-13 when
the company was increasing its capacities and raised debt to fund its expansion plans. Once the expanded
capacity became functional, it used the extra profits 	it could make to pay off 	its debt (from 	₹201 cr. to 	₹122
cr.) and brought down its D/E in 2014 to 0.4.
Some investors like to use only secured or 	long-term debt for calculating D/E ratio. However, I prefer taking
total debt for calculating D/E ratio.
CR is calculated as a ratio of current assets of a company to its current liabilities.

-- 48 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
48 |	48 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Current Ratio = Current Assets	Current Ratio = Current Assets 	/ Current Liabilities	/ Current Liabilities
Current assets (CA) are the assets that are consumed within next one year. They include inventory that gets
consumed and gets sold as finished product within a year, cash & 	similar investments kept by the company
to meet day to day requirements and money due 	from customers (account receivables or debtors) and loans
given to different parties that are expected to be received back within a year.
Current liabilities (CL) include payables within next one year and the 	short-term provisions.
CR of >1 means that the 	company has CA which exceed CL and that the company would be able to 	pay off
its near-term liabilities by the money it would receive from current assets.
Let us see the current ratio (CR) of VOL over time. Figures are in 	₹Cr. (10 million). Some calculations
might show some mismatch because of 	rounding off.
Year 	2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014
Inventories 	(A) 	9 	8 	8 	12 	12 	19 	35 	43 	55 	47
Receivables 	(B) 	8 	13 	20 	22 	28 	36 	52 	86 	113 	115
Cash 	(C 	) 	0 	1 	0 	0 	0 	0 	0 	32 	34 	45
Current Assets	Current Assets
(CA=A+B+C)	(CA=A+B+C) 	17	17 	22	22 	28	28 	34	34 	40	40 	55	55 	87	87 	161	161 	202	202 	207	207
Current 	Liabilities(D) 	12 	12 	15 	18 	18 	19 	29 	50 	86 	99
Provisions 	(E 	) 	1 	1 	1 	3 	4 	4 	8 	14 	19 	21
Total CL (CL=D+E)	Total CL (CL=D+E) 	12	12 	13	13 	17	17 	21	21 	22	22 	23	23 	38	38 	64	64 	105	105 	120	120
CR (CA/CL)	CR (CA/CL) 	1.4	1.4 	1.7	1.7 	1.7	1.7 	1.6	1.6 	1.9	1.9 	2.4	2.4 	2.3	2.3 	2.5	2.5 	1.9	1.9 	1.7	1.7
We can see 	that VOL has been consistently maintaining CAs in excess of CLs, 	which is a very healthy sign.
Investors should look for companies that have CR of at least 1.25 or more.
This section provides details of the cash that a company has 	generated in last financial year from operation
(cash flow from operations or CFO). 	This section also includes details of cash used in making investments
or received from selling investments (cash-flow from investing activities or CFI) and cash raised from
financial institutions as borrowings or repaid to them during the last year (cash-flow from financing
activities or CFF).
An investor should focus on companies, which generate a good amount of cash flow from operations that
can take care of their requirements of investment (CFI) and repayment of debt (CFF). If an investor can

-- 49 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
49 |	49 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
find a company that generates so much cash that after taking care of CFI and CFF, 	it still has a surplus left,
she would have hit a jackpot.
Let us see the cash flow statement of VOL over time. Figures are in 	₹Cr. (10 million). Some calculations
might show some mismatch because of rounding off. 	Positive values mean cash inflow and negative values
mean cash outflow.
Year 	2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014
CFO 	(A) 	4 	2 	2 	12 	27 	29 	31 	20 	92 	134
CFI 	(B) 	-8 	-7 	-3 	-17 	-40 	-35 	-39 	-61 	-113 	-9
CFF 	(C 	) 	1 	5 	1 	5 	13 	6 	7 	72 	22 	-113
Net Cash Flow (A+B+C) 	-2 	1 	-1 	0 	1 	0 	0 	30 	2 	12
Cash 	at 	the 	end 	of 	year 	1 	1 	1 	1 	2 	2 	2 	32 	34 	45
We can see that VOL has been generating a good amount of cash from operations year on year. CFO has
increased during 2005-14 from 	₹4 cr. (0.04 billion) to 	₹134 cr. (1.34 billion). We can observe that during
2005-13, VOL was funding its expansion plans (negative CFI) by a 	mix of operating cash (CFO) and debt
(CFF).
In 2014, the company did 	not undertake any major expansion. The expansions done 	in past year is 	bringing
in increased cash each year for VOL. In 2014, the company used this cash to pay off its debt (CFI is -113
cr.) and reduced its 	debt from 	₹201 cr. to 	₹122 cr. (see table in 	D/E section above).
Until now, we have used ratios and growth rates that utilized figures from either B/S or P&L or CF alone.
We have not used the ratios/parameters that utilize figures across these three financial statements.
Comparative analysis of B/S, P&L and CF 	is necessary, as it will provide a sanctity check on the numbers
reported by any company. It will also provide further insights into the financial position and operating
efficiency of the company. Some of the parameters that indicate operating efficiency of a company use a
mix 	of 	B/S 	and 	P&L 	like 	Inventory 	turnover 	ratio, 	receivables 	turnover, 	payables 	turnover 	etc.
These parameters are the next level of analysis, which an investor should do when she is well versed with
the parameters discussed above. However, one analysis that compares P&L with the CF is mandatory for
each investor to perform on every company she is studying. It compares the cumulative net profit (profit
after tax, PAT) of last few years with the cumulative CFO of the same period.

-- 50 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
50 |	50 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
A company that sells any product today might not receive its payment immediately. However, it is
legitimately eligible to receive it. Therefore, accounting standards allow it to report this sale and its profit
in the P&L. However, the money received from the buyer will be reflected in CFO only when the money
is actually received from the buyer.
Therefore, if we compare PAT and CFO for any one year, they would differ from each other. However,
over a long time, cumulative PAT and CFO should be similar.
If cumulative PAT is similar to CFO, it means that the company is able to collect its profits in actual cash	
from its buyers. If CFO is abysmally lower than PAT, it would mean that either the company though
legitimately eligible to receive money from the 	buyer, is not able to 	collect it or the profits are 	fictitious. In
either case, the investor should avoid such a 	company.
Let us compare cumulative PAT and CFO of VOL over time. Figures are in 	₹Cr. (10 million). Some
calculations might show some mismatch because of rounding off.
Year 	2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014 	Total	Total
PAT 	3 	2 	4 	15 	25 	40 	52 	55 	69 	86 	351	351
CFO 	4 	2 	2 	12 	27 	29 	31 	20 	92 	134 	353	353
We can see that VOL registered profits of 	₹351 cr. (3.51 billion) during 	2015-2014 and collected 	₹353 cr.
(3.53 billion) net cash flows from operations. This is 	a very healthy sign for any 	company.
In the current chapter, we 	learnt about financial analysis of a company in details. The parameters discussed
above are essential ones and should suffice for basic due diligence by any retail investor. As we would
agree that there is never an end to the analysis and analysts do spend years analyzing companies. There are
hundreds of more ratios, which can be used to gain further insights into the financial position of any
company.
However, I believe that 	if a retail investor can 	analyse the eight parameters discussed above and 	importantly
understand the trend of this parameter 	over the life of the 	company, then she would easily be able 	to select
financially sound stocks out of thousands of options available to her. She would also be able to avoid
financially bad companies and spare a 	lot of her time that 	might have gone into studying such bad companies
further.
I would summarize the eight financial parameters 	here:
1. 	Sales growth: Look for high and sustainable growth >15% per year. The growth rate of >50% is
unsustainable.
2. 	Profitability: Look for high and sustainable OPM and NPM. I prefer companies with NPM of 	>8%.

-- 51 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
51 |	51 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
3. 	Tax: Tax rate should be near general corporate tax rate unless some specific tax incentive is
applicable to the company.
4. 	Interest coverage: Look for companies with interest coverage ratio of >3.
5. 	Debt to Equity ratio: Look for companies with low/nil debt. Preferably D/E 	<0.5
6. 	Current ratio: Look for companies with CR >1.25
7. 	Cash flow: Positive CFO is necessary. It's great if CFO meets the outflow for CFI and CFF.
8. 	Cumulative PAT vs CFO: Look for companies where cumulative PAT and 	CFO are similar for 	last
10 years.
In the past, there have been many instances where managements/companies have tried to use shortcuts to
show good financial performance in reported numbers when the actual business on the ground was not	
doing well. Such instances have been common throughout the 	world whether it be Enron in 	USA or Satyam
in India.
It is important that every investor learns about 	the tricks being used by such managements and 	while doing
financial analysis takes care to find out whether the performance being shown is genuine or artificially
made up.
Therefore, this book has a 	chapter dedicated to the common shortcuts used 	by companies to dress up their
financial statement.

-- 52 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
52 |	52 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We all know about one company or the other, which had manipulated its accounts to dupe investors.
Instances of management manipulating the books of accounts are not bound by any geography, race,
religion or culture. Be it USA (Enron, WorldCom), Europe (Paramalat), India (Satyam) or Japan 	(Toshiba),
each market has its own share of ‘stalwarts’, who instead of genuinely improving the business, decided to
cook the books to show better performance.
Nowadays, 	most 	of 	the 	companies 	offer 	share 	price 	linked 	incentive 	schemes 	to 	their 	managers. 	Such	
schemes are offered to align the interests of managers and shareholders so that both can benefit from the
good performance of the company and its stock. However, these schemes have acted as double-edged
swords.
Share price linked incentives motivate 	managers to work hard and 	show good performance. Nevertheless,
when times are tough and business is a slump, they offer easy incentives to managers for dressing up the
accounts to show a good picture to the markets to shore up the share price.
In the hindsight, the analysis of disclosures & exchange filings of such companies has always pointed to
clues, which could have helped investors in identifying the red flags. However, the key is to identify such
clues before the problems become large enough to affect the share price. These clues, if identified at right
times, could have guided investors to exit before the 	nefarious acts of these companies became public and
their prices fell like a pack of cards.
Therefore, it becomes essential that all 	stock market investors, be it institutional or individual should learn
the tools/signs that can indicate when a company starts deviating from the standard practices and the
possibility of an underlying fraud becomes a real possibility. The signs that can tell an investor, whenever
something is not right with the presented accounts. An investor can then, analyse the company deeper 	and
rule out whether the company is trying to falsify its books and if so, then can exit the company’s s	tock at
the earliest 	opportunity.
Recently, I read the book: 	“Financial Shenanigans: How to Detect Accounting Gimmicks &	“Financial Shenanigans: How to Detect Accounting Gimmicks & 	Frauds in	Frauds in
Financial Reports”	Financial Reports” 	by Howard M. Schilit and Jeremy Pe 	rler. This book provides a comprehensive account
of the possible juggleries that managements can play to dress up their financial statements. It helps the
readers identify the signs/tools that could have caught these juggleries at an early 	stage.
The book explains various methods deployed by companies in the past to manipulate their earnings, cash
flows and balance sheet metrics. It then takes the reader through the key parts of their disclosures, which
could have directed a discerning reader to the gimmicks played by the management. Finally, the book
explains to the reader with calculations, various ways to find 	out the correct earnings and cash flows from
the inflated numbers presented by the companies.
“Financial Shenanigans” provides an easy to read and simple to understand explanations of complex
circuitous acts of managements to dress up 	their financials.

-- 53 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
53 |	53 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The current chapter attempts to summarize the comprehensive effort of the authors, Howards Schilit &
Jeremy Perler and presents the gist to investors to sensitize them about the need to learn more about such
shenanigans.
Most of the attempts to dress up the accounting books by management are focused on manipulation of
earnings (revenue & profit), cash flows and balance sheet to present a better picture of deteriorating the
financial situation.
Let us understand these attempts one by one:
Most of the companies attempt to show 	higher revenue & profits during the current period 	to meet or exceed
market expectations. Higher earnings in the current period act as a 	strong factor to raise the market price 	of
company’s 	shares 	and 	increase 	the 	wealth 	of 	promoters/managers 	who 	stand 	to 	benefit 	from 	their
stake/stock options in the company.
However, there have been cases when companies have tried to 	mask the current good performance and tried
to defer revenue/profits to a future period so that they can show sustained performance during upcoming
tough times.
Deferring current good earnings for future periods helps 	the company to show sustained performance during
bad 	times, 	thereby, 	giving the 	impression 	of 	the 	resilient 	business model 	to 	the 	markets. 	Stock 	markets
usually assign higher multiples (P/E ratio) to such companies, which show stable performance with low
volatility in earnings. Therefore, the management has sufficient incentive to act both ways.
Management may use the 	following techniques to inflate their current period earnings:
 	Recording revenue too soon
 	Recording bogus revenue
 	Boosting income by using one time or 	unsustainable activities
 	Shifting current expenses to a later period
 	Using techniques to hide expenses or losses
Management may use the following techniques to subdue their current period earnings in an attempt to
inflate future period earnings:
 	Shifting current income to a later 	period
 	Shifting future expenses to an earlier period
All these steps could easily help the 	management achieve their objectives. However, there are certain checks
and balances in place in 	the system, which often play the spoilsport for such 	managements:
 	the requirements of disclosures about revenue recognition and other accounting policies and

-- 54 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
54 |	54 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
 	the presence of three financial statement: Balance Sheet, Profit & Loss and Cash Flow Statement,
which talk to each other. If the 	management tinkers with one of these statements, then there is very
high probability that investors would find signs 	of unhealthiness in other two 	statements.
We would look at the methods to detect earnings manipulation by management in the later part of this
chapter.
Most of the corporate frauds in 1990-2000s involved the companies showing super-normal growth in
revenues & profits. However, upon analysis of cash flows, it could easily be deciphered that the earnings
were not backed by cash flows. Therefore, all the investors started analyzing cash flow statements to see
whether the profits are 	being converted into cash flow from 	operations to verify the genuineness of earnings.
Cash flow from operations (CFO) became the key parameter to analyse companies. However, the ever-
evolving managements realized this pattern and soon enough devised techniques to manipulate cash flow
statements as well, so that they could 	hide ineligible/bogus revenue practices from investors.
These techniques mainly focused on either shifting investing/financing inflow to operating section or
shifting 	operating outflow to investing section. The book “Financial Shenanigan” classifies such attempts
under following headings:
 	Showing financing cash inflow as 	operating inflow
 	Showing operating cash outflow as 	investing outflow
 	Using acquisitions or disposals to boost 	operating cash flow
 	Boosting operating cash flow by 	using unsustainable activities
However, in these cases as 	well, the mandatory requirement of reconciliation of three financial statements
helped the investors. Reconciliation requires that all the entries of cash inflow or outflow have to be in the
cash flow statement and the management can only change their classification from one head to another.
Therefore, if an investor uses certain adjustments in her analysis of cash flows then she can easily detect
such shenanigans and improve her stock analysis to reflect the true economic reality.
The book “Financial Shenanigans” describes many ways in which over jealous managements distort the
balance sheet presentations 	to show a rosy picture to 	investors. Some of these methods are:
 	Distorting account 	receivables to hide revenue problems: 	e.g. by selling them, showing them 	in
other receivables than account receivables, changing definitions of DSO (days of 	sales outstanding
or receivables days) etc.

-- 55 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
55 |	55 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
 	Distorting inventory metrics to hide profitability problems: By classifying certain inventory as
noncurrent saying that it will not be used within one year. Using only in-store inventory and
excluding warehouse & transit inventory etc.
 	Distorting financial asset metrics to hide impairment problems: mainly applicable for financial
institutions, which might use various tricks to 	hide the actual stress in their loan 	books.
Many times, managements create new 	parameters to describe their business performance. Such parameters
are not the 	standard parameters of profitability or efficiency as described in 	accounting standards. However,
many times, they help investors understand the status of companies of any particular industry in a better
fashion.
Such creative parameters are 	essential but due to non-standardization, the managements get an opportunity
to change their definitions as per their requirements. Some of the examples covered in the book “Financial
Shenanigans” are:
 	“Same store sales” for retailers, restaurants	“Same store sales” for retailers, restaurants: Managements may alter the 	vintage/criteria of the
eligible stores to be used in the calculation of disclosed metric. Companies have been known to
show a high level of reverse engineering skills to create such eligibility criteria to show the desired
trend in performance.
 	ARPU (average revenue per user) for telecom, broadband or cable TV companies:	ARPU (average revenue per user) for telecom, broadband or cable TV companies: 	The key
here is what constitutes the revenue and the number of users in ARPU. Management of one
company may exclude advertisement revenue and report only subscription revenue whereas
management of another company may include advertisement and other certain items as well.	Similarly, different companies may use different criteria to select the number of users for
calculating ARPU.
 	Subscriber 	addition 	for 	media 	houses:	Subscriber 	addition 	for 	media 	houses: 	Some 	companies 	may 	add 	up 	subscribers 	of
unconsolidated entities/JVs as 	well, while others may 	not.
 	The order book for contractors	The order book for contractors: Some companies may not 	disclose the details about orders, which
might contain cancellation clauses/indemnity clauses and club all orders as if they might be firm
sources of revenue in future.
 	Using EBITDA rather than PAT for disclosing business performance:	Using EBITDA rather than PAT for disclosing business performance: 	Some companies may
act as if key expenses like depreciation, interest etc., are irrelevant for businesses and investors.
For many companies, like rental cars, depreciation is the real cost of inventory & operations.
Looking at EBITDA only for such companies is highly misleading.
 	Presenting cash earnings (PAT + Depreciation) or EBITDA instead of CFO to investors as	Presenting cash earnings (PAT + Depreciation) or EBITDA instead of CFO to investors as
better parameters	better parameters: Some managements may stress 	on cash earnings as if changes in 	the working
capital do not matter for 	businesses.
All the above-described methods have been used by one 	company or the other in past to 	dress up its books
in order to hide their deteriorating financial position from the markets & investors. The book “Financial
Shenanigans” provides detail of each of these tools used by different managements with real life examples.

-- 56 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
56 |	56 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
“Financial Shenanigans” delves deeper into regulatory & exchange filings done by these companies and
digs out extracts from their disclosures, which 	if noticed by investors, could have 	alerted them about things
not being right. Then, the investors could have analysed it 	further to reassess their investment positions.
“Financial Shenanigans” also explains various tools and ratios, which if used by inv	estors during analysis,
would have helped them, identify the red flags. Some of these tools can be easily calculated from the
publically available information and therefore, can be very helpful for 	all the readers. Let us discuss these
tools, which I believe that every stock market investor should learn and 	use in her stock analysis framework:
As discussed above, if any company inflates its revenue by either accelerating its revenue recognition or
recording false/bogus revenue, then there is a 	high probability that such revenue would not be backed by 	a
collection of cash. In such cases, 	the cumulative CFO would fall behind cumulative PAT.
Therefore, investors should always compare cCFO and cPAT of any company over last 10 years and be
wary when cCFO is significantly less than cPAT. Such companies would require enhanced due diligence
before the investor commits her hard earned money to them.
Similar to the above point, inflated revenue 	recognition without the backing of cash collections would lead
to continuously increasing account receivables/trade receivables/debtors in the balance sheet. The 	increase
in account receivables, if at a faster pace 	than increase in sales, would increase the Receivables Days/DSO.
Many times, such receivables could be bogus receivables, which might not be realised ever. 	Therefore, the
investor should be wary of investing in companies, which show continuously increasing receivables days.
Similar to the increase in account receivables, a 	continuous increase in unbilled receivables also reflects an
aggressive revenue recognition policy. Investors should be 	very cautious while 	analyzing companies with
a large amount of 	unbilled receivables like infrastructure companies and EPC 	contractors.
Moreover, investors should also be concerned when they see a large drop in DSO/receivables days
especially after a period of rapid increase in DSO. This is because such drop in DSO might be due to the
management using the tricks to either sell receivables off their books or classify them under any 	other head
in the balance sheet.
Inventory buildup may indicate that the company might be 	carrying old inventory on its books, which might
not be useful anymore. Management may hesitate before writing off such inventory, as it would have to
book impairment losses, which would reduce earnings.

-- 57 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
57 |	57 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
However, such write-offs if genuinely needed, then cannot be deferred indefinitely and companies end up
recognizing major impairment losses all of a sudden. Such large 	losses affect the earnings in a 	big way and
no doubt that the share price 	tanks both due to losses and due 	to management quality concerns.
Therefore, an investor should do extra due diligence when she comes across companies, which have
continuously decreasing inventory turnover over the years.
“Financial Shenanigans” mentions many cases where companies tried to inflate their earning and CFO by
capitalizing normal day-to-day operating expenses. By using this trick, the companies derive dual benefits.	
They improve their profits as they do not deduct these expenses from 	revenue and at the same 	time inflate
CFO as they show these 	expenses as cash outflow for investing section rather than in 	operating section.
Detecting such tricks can be quite challenging for an amateur investor who does not have a deep
understanding of accounting & finance as well as does not have sufficient spare time to spend in deeply
analyzing financial statements. However, the investor can safeguard herself from these 	management tricks
by using a 	simple 	method. 	This method is 	using 	the Free 	Cash Flow 	(FCF) rather 	than 	Cash from 	Operations
(CFO) for her analysis.
FCF is arrived at by deducting capital expenditure (Capex) from CFO and thereby taking care of the
operating expenses excluded from P&L and shown as 	a cash outflow from investing section.
FCF = CFO	FCF = CFO 	–– 	Capex	Capex
Therefore, it is advised that and 	investor should:
 	focus more on cash flow statement than P&L.
 	Moreover, she should rely more on FCF 	than CFO, while analyzing cash flow 	statement.
The investor should be cautious when she observes declining free cash (FCF) 	while strong CFO in the cash
flow statements.
Acquisitions are a favorite area for over-smart managers to hide a lot of things under the carpet. Analysis
of financials become a lot complex when two companies merge with each other and the management
presents combined financial statements for the two companies.
Apart from the 	book manipulations, acquisitions also provide many legal means (loopholes) for 	acquiring
companies to beautify their books. Improvement in CFO is one such loophole. Let’s see how it works:
Account receivables of the acquired company, when received, 	flow through the CFO of 	acquirer, whereas	
the costs incurred to generate these receivables (inventory bought by the acquired company, salaries paid
in past etc.), which ideally should flow through CFO as outflow, now flow through CFI as outflow as
acquisition cost for the 	acquiring company.

-- 58 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
58 |	58 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We can see that if 	any company that tries to grow organically, then it would have to do a lot of cash outflow
from operations (inventory purchase, salaries etc.) to generate cash inflow from 	operations (CFO), whereas
in acquisition, the acquiring company gets target’s future cash inflow from operations (outstanding account
receivables at time of acquisition) but its related cash outflow (acquisition cost) is recorded as cash outflow
from investing.
Therefore, acquisitions provide a legal method of boosting CFO. No wonder once companies realize this,
they become serial acquirers.
“Financial Shenanigans” provide a tool to counter this inflated CFO position. The authors advise that the
investors should use:
CFO - Capex outflow -	CFO - Capex outflow - 	Cash paid for acquisitions	Cash paid for acquisitions
to mitigate this impact.
An investor should be cautious while she comes across companies that show deviation from normal trends
like:
 	Unexpected stable/smooth earnings during tough volatile times
 	Continuous history of meeting market expectation of earnings
This is not to say that such companies would not have the inherent business strength to show exceptional
performance. However, there is a high probability that management of 	such companies might be managing
their accounts to show such performance. Therefore, it is advised that the investor should do enhanced due
diligence while analyzing these companies.
Changes in accounting policies are one of the major methods used by managements to hide financial
juggleries. Major policies to be monitored for changes 	by investors are:
 	Change in revenue 	recognition policies
 	Change in capitalization of expenses 	policies
 	Change in accounting years (April-March to July-June to Jan-Dec etc.)
 	Change in 	depreciation assumptions
 	Change in pension, lease 	assumptions
An investor should always ask herself the question: Why the particular accounting change and why now?
Similarly, investors should focus on 	variations in disclosures:
 	Be wary when company stops disclosing an important metric.

-- 59 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
59 |	59 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
 	Failing to highlight off balance sheet obligations/contingent liabilities like corporate guarantees
given to the bank for loans taken 	by other parties or a 	lawsuit or claim filed against the company.
 	New disclosures should provide more answers not give rise to 	many new questions. If the reverse
is true, then management is hiding something.
These are some of the tools described by “Financial Shenanigans” to help investorsrecognize accounting
manipulations at initial stages and protect their hard earned money.
After reading the book “Financial Shenanigans”, the reader wouldrealize that managements of many of the
well-known names in the world have used 	accounting tricks at some point in time. 	They have mostly been
caught by regulators, penalized, and directed to rectify their books. It indicates that no 	investor is shielded
from accounting juggleries and she can ignore learning about at 	her own peril.
The book describes numerous ways of accounting manipulation that have been used by 	firms and similarly
many other ways/indicators, which can highlight the use of nefarious methods in the financial statement.
However, covering all of them is not possible within one chapter. However, the investor should be aware
that ever-evolving financial landscape would provide newer opportunities for over smart managements to
use shortcuts to achieve their targets.
Therefore, it becomes essential that every investor should learn about the basic tools to highlight any
accounting manipulation and use them regularly in her stock analysis so that she can avoid investments in
fraud companies and save her 	hard-earned wealth from erosion.

-- 60 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
60 |	60 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR) is the rate of 	growth, which a company can achieve 	from its profits
without relying on additional sources like debt or equity dilution. SSGR estimation has occupied an
important part of my stock analysis as 	it indicates the strength of the business model of a 	company.
A company with high self-sustainable growth rate can 	continue to show high growth rates without impairing
its capital structure, i.e. without raising high debt. I believe that the growth funded by profits is the best
form of growth as it keeps the company insulated from many adverse factors during tough economic	
environments.
Debt has a high cost attached to it. The interest eats into the profitability. Interest and principal need to be
paid as per agreed on 	schedule irrespective of 	the company 	generating profits or not. This increases the 	risk
of bankruptcy during tough times.
The shareholders of debt-free companies can sleep easy at night irrespective of the company facing
economic headwinds or tailwinds. Debt-free companies have the leeway of reducing prices, dividend
payouts 	and 	even 	suffer 	losses 	for 	a 	longer 	period 	than 	debt-laden 	companies. 	Therefore, 	debt-free
companies have a higher probability of coming out successful from economic downturns and provide
avenues of long-term growth to investors at lower risk.
Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR) is one such parameter that can help an investor determine, which
companies would be able to show debt free growth in future. The investor can then study further about
these companies and post detailed analysis, she can shortlist companies for investment. The investor,
convinced with detailed financial, business, management & valuation analysis and high SSGR, can keep
the invested companies in her portfolio with confidence.
I thank my friend, Saurabh Dwivedi, a sea-surfer turned banker, for providing his valuable time & inputs
where after multiple rounds of discussions & iterations, we could bring the self-sustainable growth rate
(SSGR) formula to the 	implementation stage.
Self-sustainable growth rate derives its genesis from the basic outline of a company’s growth story. During
its life, a company needs to:
1. 	Sell products in the market
2. 	Generate profits from these sales
3. 	Pay dividends from its profits
4. 	Invest undistributed profits in company’s assets
5. 	Use these assets to produce sales in 	the future
A company needs to do these activities year on year for long periods. If the company were able to do it
successfully, then it would generate a 	huge amount of wealth for its shareholders.

-- 61 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
61 |	61 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The efficiency level of 	any company on the steps discussed above can 	be easily assessed by readily available
information in public domain:
1. 	Net Profit Margin (NPM):	Net Profit Margin (NPM): 	NPM highlights the ability of the company to generate profits from
sales.
2. 	Dividend Payout Ratio (DPR):	Dividend Payout Ratio (DPR): 	DPR indicates the 	share of profits that is 	distributed as dividends
to shareholders. (1-DPR) reflects the share of profits retained by the company for reinvestment in
its own operations.
3. 	Depreciation (Dep):	Depreciation (Dep): 	Depreciation indicates the wear & tear of a company’s assets over time. It is
an indicator of reduced efficiency of existing assets to produce sales as these assets become older.
4. 	Net Fixed Assets Turnover (NFAT):	Net Fixed Assets Turnover (NFAT): 	NFAT provides the sales generation ability of a company
from its net fixed assets. (net 	fixed assets = gross fixed assets 	– 	depreciation)
If an investor analyses the combined effect the 	four parameters discussed above, then she would be able to
arrive at the expected 	growth rate of a 	company by utilizing only the retained profits. This expected 	growth
rate is Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR).
The central theme of self-sustainable growth rate calculation is to first, find out the amount of funds
available for reinvestment and then, the efficiency level with which these invested funds are 	utilized by the
company. We can understand it by 	the elaboration given below:
 	Funds available for reinvestment (Reinvest-able funds) = (Sales in 	Year ‘0’)*NPM*(1-DPR)
 	Fixed assets at end of the year ‘0’/start of year ‘1’ = Fixed assets at start of year ‘0’ –Depreciation
+ Reinvest-able funds
 	Sales expected in next year (Year ‘1’) = Fixed assets at end of year ‘0’ * 	NFAT
 	Self-sustainable growth rate (SSGR) in % = (Sales in Year ‘1’ / Sales in Year ‘0’)	-1
Using the understanding of SSGR as discussed above and some simple algebraic operations, the formula
of SSGR calculation is reduced to 	the following equation:
SSGR = [(1-Dep) +	SSGR = [(1-Dep) + 	NFAT*NPM*(1-DPR)] - 1	NFAT*NPM*(1-DPR)] - 1
Where,
 	SSGR = Self Sustainable Growth Rate in %
 	Dep = Depreciation rate as a % of net fixed assets
 	NFAT = Net fixed asset turnover (Sales/average net fixed assets over the year)
 	NPM = Net profit margin as % of sales
 	DPR = Dividend paid as % of net profit after tax
The Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR) formula is 	a simplified one, because:
1. 	All the input ratios like NPM, Depreciation, Dividend Payout, and Fixed Asset Turnover keep on
changing year after year and the huge variation in any one year can significantly alter the SSGR
output.

-- 62 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
62 |	62 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
2. 	The formula assumes that profits reinvested in any year get converted into fixed assets in the same
year and start generating sales from next year. However, in 	reality, any capital expenditure (capex)
done by a company would take a few months or years to become operational in form of increased
production capacity.
3. 	The formula does not factor in an important parameter where funds are locked in or released during
the year, which is working capital.
Out of the three points highlighted above, first two points can be mitigated by taking an average of last 3-
year data of all the 	ratios i.e. NPM, Depreciation, Dividend Payout and Net Fixed Asset Turnover. Taking
average will reduce the impact of any single year abnormal high/low value. Simultaneously, it will also
ensure that the impact of reinvested profits of each year get distributed over 3 years, which 	is a reasonable
period for any company to operationalize new capex into enhanced capacity.
Important	Important: I have used the 3-year average of all the 	ratios for the cases discussed in the illustrations below.
Regarding the third point of funds being locked in/released from working capital, an investor can find the
evidence from a comparison of cumulative net profit after tax (cPAT) of last 10 years with the cash flow
from operations (cCFO) over the same 	period. Based on her case-specific findings, the investor can adjust
her interpretation of SSGR outcome to reflect the reality. We would discuss some of such cases in the
interpretation section below.
It indicates that the company has the ability to generate cash in excess of the requirement to sustain its
current growth rate. Such companies usually keep on accumulating cash, can afford to give high dividends
without impacting prospects of future growth or can increase their growth rate in future without straining
their capital structure.
We can see examples of a few companies that have their self-sustainable growth rate (SSGR) more than
their current growth rates.
FDC Limited	FDC Limited

-- 63 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
63 |	63 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The self-sustainable growth rate (SSGR) of FDC Limited is about 30-40%. However, the company has
been 	growing 	at 	about 	8-10% 	over 	last 	10 	years. 	Comparison 	of 	past 	sales 	growth 	with 	SSGR 	would
indicate that its entire growth could be funded by its profits. An investor can notice that FDC Limited has
very low & almost nil 	debt on its books.
Container Corporation of India Limited	Container Corporation of India Limited
We can see that the self-sustainable growth rate (SSGR) of Container Corporation of India Limited 	is about
22-25%. However, the company has been growing at about 8-11% over last 10 years. Comparison of past
sales growth with SSGR would indicate that it could fund its entire growth by its profits. No wonder that
Container Corporation of India Limited is a 	debt free company.
Thus we can see that the companies with SSGR higher than past sales growth are either debt free or have
reduced their debt significantly over the past. These companies are 	good investment candidates as they can
keep growing without the need of debt 	and can face tough economic situations better.

-- 64 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
64 |	64 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Such a situation will indicate that the company’s business model does not have the inh	erent strength to
sustain the growth rate it is trying to achieve. The company would continuously need to supplement its
profits by bringing in additional cash from equity infusion or debt, to fund its growth aspirations. Most of
such companies rely primarily on debt to meet the requirement of additional cash and thereby see high
levels of debt on their 	balance sheets.
Let us see examples of a few companies that are 	growing at a rate higher than their self-sustainable growth
rate (SSGR).
Castex Technologies Limited (erstwhile Amtek India Limited)	Castex Technologies Limited (erstwhile Amtek India Limited)
We can see from the above data that the self-sustainable growth rate (SSGR) of Amtek India Limited is
very low, almost 0-1%. This is primarily because of very low fixed asset turnover of 0.6-0.7. Low SSGR
indicates that almost entire sales growth of 	25-30% in the past has 	been debt-funded. There is little surprise
left in the observation that the debt of Amtek India Limited has increased from 	₹156 cr. to 	₹5,186 cr. over
last 10 years.

-- 65 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
65 |	65 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Limited	Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Limited
We can see that the self-sustainable growth rate (SSGR) of Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Limited is about 15-
18%. However, the company has been growing at about 25-30% over last 10 years. It indicates that the
excess sales growth of 8-10% in the past has been funded by debt. Therefore, the debt of Glenmark
Pharmaceuticals Limited has increased from 	₹437 cr. to 	₹3,267 cr. over last 10 years.
We can see that for all these companies, which are trying to grow at a pace faster than their inherent self-
sustainable growth rate (SSGR), their debt levels are spiralling in an attempt to provide funds needed to
produce the excess growth. The debt-funded growth exposes the company and its shareholders to high risk
of reduced profitability and 	bankruptcy during tough economic situations.
Ideally, companies with self-sustainable growth rate (SSGR) less than current growth rate are expected to
see high debt levels as seen in the above discussion. It is with the assumption that such companies do not
generate sufficient funds from their profits to meet the requirements of growth. However, an investor would
come across companies where despite low self-sustainable growth rate (SSGR), the companies have
reduced their debt levels.
In most of these companies, the investor would find that the companies have improved their operating
efficiency over the years or have sold their assets to generate cash to repay debt.
Improved operating efficiency would release funds stuck in working capital 	either in the form of 	inventory
or receivables. Increasing inventory turnover or 	decreasing receivables days lead to 	funds stuck in working
capital being released. It would be evident from cCFO of last 10 years being higher than cPAT over the
same period.
Funds raised from sales of the assets would appear as positive cash from CFI (cash flow from investing).

-- 66 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
66 |	66 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We can see the example of Fiem Industries Limited, which has SSGR lower than the current growth rate.
Nevertheless, it has been able to reduce its debt by improving its operating efficiency.
Fiem Industries Limited	Fiem Industries Limited
We can see that the self-sustainable growth rate (SSGR) of Fiem Industries Limited is about 1-2%.
However, the company has been growing at about 25% over last 	10 years. Comparison of past sales growth
with SSGR would indicate that the excess sales growth should have been funded by debt. It has been true
in the past as we can see that the debt levels of Fiem Industries Limited have increased from 	₹23 cr. in
FY2005 to 	₹139 cr. in FY2012.
However, the improved inventory turnover in recent years from 	12.0 to 15.8 	has released the capital stuck
in working capital. This has led to the 	generation of excess cash by way of 	cCFO over last 2 years of 	₹148
cr. (71+77) than cPAT of 	₹64 cr. (27+37) over same 	period. The cash released from working capital could
be used by the company to reduce its debt over last 2 years from 	₹139 cr. to 	₹87 cr.
An investor should be cautious while investing in such companies, as their inherent business model cannot
sustain high growth rates they are 	trying to achieve. Debt reduction is 	mainly due to improving efficiency.
Debt levels are expected to rise when these companies reach an optimal level of operating efficiency and
are not able to reduce working capital further or do not have further non-core assets to sell.
In such companies, the investor needs to see 	whether the entire profits are available for fixed asset 	creation
or are being stuck in working capital. A 	simple test to find this out is by comparing the 	cumulative net profit
after tax (cPAT) of last 10 years with the cash flow from operations (cCFO) over the same period.
If cCFO, which 	factors in changes in the 	working capital, were significantly less than cPAT, then it 	would
indicate that the company would not be able to maintain its current growth rate without raising additional

-- 67 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
67 |	67 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
funds. Otherwise, the company would need to raise additional cash through either equity or 	debt to fund its
increased working capital needs along with growth.
We can see that the companies, which have high Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR), are able to grow
in a debt-free 	manner and provide good wealth creation opportunities for shareholders.
High Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR) is dependent upon below factors:
1. 	High net profit margins (NPM)
2. 	Low dividend payout ratio (DPR)
3. 	Low depreciation (Dep)
4. 	High net fixed asset turnover (NFAT)
Therefore, a company that currently has low Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR), can improve its SSGR
by:
1. 	Improving its profitability (NPM) so that it generates higher funds by 	profits
2. 	Reducing dividend payouts so that most of the profits are reinvested in company’s operations
3. 	Increase net fixed asset turnover (NFAT) by using better technology & processes so that it can
produce more sales from the same amount of fixed assets.
I believe that an investor should invest in companies, which have nil or very low debt on their books. Such
companies are easy to find by filtering all the stocks on debt to equity parameter. However, the ideal
investments are the stocks, which can remain debt-free when they grow in future. The investor can find
such stocks by analyzing the Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR) during detailed analysis.
This brings us to the end of 	this chapter in which we learned about assessing the inherent growth capabilities
of companies. We noticed that companies trying to grow at a higher rate than the self-sustainable growth
rate (SSGR) end up having a lot 	of debt on their balance sheet. Such companies expose the shareholders to
high risk. On the other hand, if companies having self-sustainable growth rate (SSGR) higher than the
current growth rate, then they can keep on growing without raising debt and provide good long-term
investment opportunities for investors.

-- 68 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
68 |	68 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Valuation analysis is conducted to decide whether the stock of a company is current selling at attractive
(cheap/undervalued), fair (rightly priced) or expensive (overvalued) valuations. Valuation analysis is the
second level of filter post financial analysis, used to select stocks for 	further analysis. Only the stocks that
satisfy the criteria of good financial performance and 	attractive valuations should be analysed further.
Once an investor has found a financially strong company by using the parameters highlighted in the
previous chapter, she should do the valuation 	analysis to check 	whether the stock of 	the company is priced
right.
If the shares of a company are 	overvalued then the investor should avoid investing in it, however, good the
company’s financial position may be. Investing hard-earned money in overvalued stocks exposes the
investor to higher levels of risk where the potential of future appreciation is limited but the risk of losing
money is high. Therefore, valuation analysis becomes paramount before taking a decision to buy any stock.
Valuation analysis compares the stock market values of the stock of a company with its financial
parameters. Stock market values consist of current market price (CMP), market capitalization (MCap) etc.
Various financial parameters, which are used in 	valuation analysis, are earning per share (EPS), 	sales, sales
growth rate, earnings (EPS) growth rate, book value, shareholder’s equity, dividend payout etc.
Different investors have devised many criteria to assess the current valuation levels of the stock of a
company. Some of these criteria are:
P/E ratio is the most 	widely used parameter to analyse whether the stock of any company is 	overvalued or
undervalued at any point in time. It is 	calculated by dividing the current market price (CMP) of a 	stock by
profit/earnings 	per share 	(EPS). It represents the price an investor pays 	to buy 	₹1 of earnings of a company.
If P/E is 10, it means that to get 	₹1 of earnings in one year from a company, the investor is paying 	₹10.
Similarly, if P/E is 20, it means that to get 	₹1 of earnings in one year from the company, the investor is
paying 	₹20. If we compare P/E ratio of 10 and 20, in the above example, it would become evident that at
P/E of 20, the investor is paying more money to get the same value of 	₹1 in earnings than when P/E 	is 10.
Investors interpret P/E ratio and its derivatives in multiple ways to 	decide about valuation level of a stock:
 	Comparing P/E ratio of the stock with the industry in which the company operates: Industry P/E
ratio is the average of P/E ratios of all the companies of the specific industry listed on the stock
exchange. If P/E ratio of the stock is higher than the industry P/E ratio, it is assumed to be
overvalued and vice versa.
 	Comparing current P/E ratio with historical P/E ratio of the stock: if P/E ratio is lower than average
P/E ratio of last 10 years, then the stock is deemed undervalued and vice versa.

-- 69 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
69 |	69 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
 	Comparing P/E ratio with earnings (EPS) growth rate (PEG 	ratio) as described below and
 	Comparing P/E ratio in form of Earnings Yield (EY) with the yield on other asset classes like
government securities (GSec), Treasury Bills etc. as described below.
PEG ratio compares the P/E ratio with the growth rate of earnings (EPS) of the company. The underlying
assumption is that a stock can command a P/E 	ratio, which is comparable to the growth rate of 	the earnings
of the company i.e. 	a company that is growing its earnings at 	25% yearly should have a P/E ratio should be	about 25.
PEG ratio is measured by dividing P/E ratio with the earnings growth rate (PEG ratio). If P/E ratio is less
than the growth rate of the earnings of the company i.e. if PEG 	ratio is less than 1, the stock is assumed to
be undervalued and vice versa.
EY takes into account the absolute value of P/E ratio. It is measured as the inverse of P/E ratio i.e. E/P. It
is calculated by dividing the EPS with CMP. EY provides an idea about the earning/returns that a stock
would produce for every 	₹ 	invested by the buyer in it.
If P/E is 	20, then EY would be 1/20 = 	5%. Many investors compare EY with Government Securities (GSec)
yield in India or Treasury yield in the USA. If EY is more than GSec/Treasury yield, then the stock is
assumed undervalued and at an attractive investment as investors would find stocks more rewarding than
bonds and shift money 	from bonds/fixed income investments to stocks.
10-year GSec yield in India is currently about 8%. As per above parameter, a stock should have EY of at
least equal to 8% (i.e. P/E ratio of 1/8 or 12.5) to be considered a better investment over bonds/GSec.
The concept of MoS by Benjamin Graham is based on EY. Graham says that the higher the difference
between EY and GSec/Treasury Yield, the safer is the stock investment.
To illustrate, suppose the investor buys a stock of company ABC Ltd at 	₹100. If EPS of ABC Ltd is 	₹10
then P/E ratio would be 10 and the EY would be 1/10 or 10%. As current GSec yield is 8%, ABC Ltd is a
good investment. Suppose, after the investor buys ABC stock, 	its price falls and become 	₹50, then the P/E
ratio would become 5 and the EY would become 1/5 i.e. 20%. EY of 20% would attract more and more
investors to shift money from bonds markets and use it to buy ABC stock as it yields 20% against GSec
yield of 8%. This new demand for ABC stock will increase its stock price and limit the downfall. Herein,

-- 70 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
70 |	70 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Graham says that higher the difference between EY and GSec/Treasury yield, higher is the Margin of
Safety.
I prefer stocks with P/E ratio of less than 10 as they offer a good margin of safety.
P/B ratio is calculated by dividing the CMP of a stock with the book value (shareholder’s equity + retained
earnings) per share. It represents the price an investor pays for 	₹1 of the net assets of the company after
settling all its outsider’s liabilities.
P/B ratio of 1 means that the investor is paying exactly the money that the assets are in company’s records.
P/B ratio of 2 means that one is paying double the amount that the assets are in company’s records. Higher
book values mean 	costlier valuations of the 	company. Stocks with 	P/B ratio of 	less than 1 	are considered
undervalued and vice versa.
I find P/B ratio irrelevant due to the usage of the historical 	cost of company’s assets while calculating the
book value. The historical cost 	might not represent 	the current market value of company’s assets. However,
P/B ratio is very important for companies in the financial sector where most of the assets are cash assets
and book value is a 	good indicator of the net worth of the 	company.
Benjamin Graham said that an investor should look for companies where P/E * P/B is < 22.5. However, I
focus mainly on companies with P/E <10 	while ignoring P/B ratio.
P/S ratio was used by James O’Shaughnessy. It is calculated by dividing CMP of astock with sales per
share of the company. It effectively compares the MCap of the company with its annual sales. If P/S ratio
of a stock is <1.5, then the stock is considered undervalued. O’Shaughnessy advised investors to sell the
stock once its P/S ratio exceeds 3.
DY is a measurement of dividend paid by a stock compared to its market price (DY = dividend paid/CMP).
If a company with CMP of 	₹100 pays a dividend of 	₹2 per share in a year, then its DY is 2%.
An investor can relate DY to the rental yield of a residential property or yield on bonds/GSec/Treasury. If
annual rental income is 	₹2 lac (0.2 million) from a flat, which has a value of 	₹1 crore (10 million), then the
rental yield of that flat is 2%. High yields, whether dividend or 	rental, mean that share/flat prices are cheaper
and low yields mean that share/flat prices are costlier. Stocks with DY of >5% are considered very
attractive.

-- 71 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
71 |	71 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
However, companies that are growing very fast 	need to invest most of the 	profits for expansion plans. Such
companies prefer to declare very small dividends. I do not focus on the DY if the company puts the retained
profits to good use.
We can find out whether the company is utilizing retained earnings to generate value for shareholders, by
comparing the amount of retained earnings with the increase in market 	capitalization of the company over
last 10 years. As per Warren Buffett, a company should generate at least $ 1 in market value for each $ 1
of profits retained. This comparison is 	an important parameter for assessing the management capability to
generate value for shareholders. I would 	discuss more about it in the 	chapters on management analysis of a
company.
Enterprise value (EV) of a company is calculated as Equity + Total Debt 	– 	Cash & Equivalents. It is a
measure of all the funds employed by a company in its operating assets irrespective of their source i.e.
whether own or borrowed funds. We 	deduct cash & equivalents as they represent the 	excess assets, which
are not deployed in the operations of the company yet. Cash investments provide interest/investment
income, which is non-operating income for the company. An individual investor should use market
capitalization (MCap) of the company in place of Equity in above formula to arrive at current EV of the
company.
EBITDA stands for earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization. EBITDA is a measure of
the amount of profits that are pertaining to all stakeholders in the company including shareholders,
bondholders or lenders.
EV/EBITDA is a measure of 	analyzing the valuation level of companies that does not 	factor in the capital
structure (debt to equity ratio) of the company.
Interpretation of EV/EBITDA is similar to P/E ratio. What P/E ratio is for equity holders of a company,
EV/EBITDA is for all stakeholders (shareholders, bondholders & lenders put together) of the company.
Low EV/EBITDA ratio represents undervalued company and vice versa.
EV/EBITDA is mainly used by investors when they plan to buy entire companies rather than investing in
a small number of 	stocks. However, it still has its relevance for equity investors.
In the current chapter, 	we learnt about various parameters used for 	doing valuation analysis of the stock of
a company in details. The parameters 	discussed above are simple ones and should suffice for the basic due
diligence by any individual investor.

-- 72 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
72 |	72 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
There are many more ratios like Price to Cash EPS ratio, Cash to MCap ratio etc., which can be used to
gain further insights into the valuation levels of the stock of a company. However, I believe that if an
investor analyses any stock on some of the parameters discussed above before she commits to buy it, she
would be able to avoid putting her hard-earned money in overvalued stocks where the potential of future
appreciation is rather limited and the risk of 	loss of money is high.
To summarize the important valuation parameters:
 	Price to Earnings ratio (P/E ratio): I prefer investing in financially sound companies with P/E ratio
of <10. They provide a good margin of safety.
 	P/E to Growth ratio (PEG ratio): should be 	<1.
 	Earnings Yield (EY): should be greater than long-term government bond yields or bank fixed
deposit interest rates.
 	Price to Book value ratio (P/B ratio): should be <1. However, I find it irrelevant for sectors other
than financial services.
 	Price to Sales ratio (P/S ratio): buy if P/S ratio is < 1.5 and sell if >3.
 	Dividend Yield (DY): Higher the better. DY of >5% is very attractive. However, I do not focus a
lot on DY for companies in 	the fast growth phase.
 	EV/EBITDA: It is a valuation parameter 	for entire stakeholders and removes the 	impact of sources
of funds (i.e. capital structure or 	debt to equity ratio).

-- 73 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
73 |	73 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Every investor, be it in any stock market across the world, would have come across many stocks, which
trade on sky high price to earnings (P/E) ratios. These P/E ratios sometimes cross all reasonable levels of
valuation logic; sometimes even crossing levels of 100!
I have been repeatedly asked by many investors whether they should invest in such high P/E stocks and
why I always stay away from such companies.
Many investors perceive high P/E companies as the ones with assured future growth and very good
management. Other investors perceive low P/E stocks as the 	ones with assured problems.
A recent incident, when I received an offer from a broker to buy stocks of an unlisted insurance company
of a very reputed financial services group, at a very high P/E ratio, made me think about different aspects
of investing in high P/E stocks. The 	argument inevitably led to a comparative analysis of 	investing in high
P/E and low P/E stocks.
The current chapter is an attempt to put in perspective the odds of success and 	the hidden risks that investors
face while investing in high P/E stocks.
Recently, I got an offer from a broker to buy stocks of HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited
at 	₹195. The company is not listed on 	stock exchanges, therefore, there are 	limited opportunities to buy its
stocks
As I am always willing to explore stocks, therefore, I thought about doing a preliminary analysis of this
opportunity. HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited provides its financials, annual reports,
investor’s presentations on its 	website. Therefore, it was not 	difficult to do a 	brief assessment.
I found that the current earnings per share of HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company is 	₹3.93, which
meant that the current price amounted to a price to earnings ratio (P/E ratio) of almost 50 (49.62 to be
precise).

-- 74 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
74 |	74 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
I am a value investor who likes to buy stocks cheap; in fact, very cheap. The cheaper, the better. Usually
less than P/E ratio of 10. The offer of shares of HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company at such a high
level (P/E ratio of 50) made me think about the proposition, which should be offered to investors to make
them buy stocks at such 	valuation levels.
A little thought brought about many factors, which might be 	put forward to the investors to convince them
about such valuation levels. Some of these factors 	are like:
 	The underpenetrated insurance market in India leading to huge market 	opportunity.
 	HDFC group having an established management track record, which gives confidence that they
would take timely decisions to 	capitalize on the opportunity
 	HDFC being a recognized brand is expected to attract required talent to grow at a fast pace
 	HDFC group companies (HDFC Limited, HDFC Bank Limited) have been accorded good
valuations by markets in terms of both price to equity ratio (PE ratio) and 	price to book value ratio
(PB ratio). This gives the confidence that if HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited
repeats the performance of its group companies, then the market might be willing to assign the
same level of valuation parameters to it 	as well.
 	and many more reasons, including that HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited, would
come with an IPO later where stocks would be sold at an even higher price. We leave such other
reasons for discussion for some other day.
I found that this proposition is no different than any other listed stock, which is currently trading at sky-
high valuations of P/E ratio of 	>50x. In all these 	cases, an investor is 	presented with an established brand,
which is mostly market leader having a huge 	untapped market potential for continued future growth. There
are many examples of such stocks like Page Industries Limited, Eicher Motors Limited, and Just Dial
Limited (which until recently, used to trade at 	P/E ratio of >75).
Therefore, the current chapter is equally relevant for stocks both in public and private markets, which are
trading at high valuations.
As mentioned earlier that I focus on stocks trading at cheap valuations. However, for a change, I started
thinking from the perspective of an investor, who decides to invest in stocks that are presented as having
“almost” certain high growth in future:

-- 75 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
75 |	75 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
 	I imagined that the investor had 	already bought HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited
at the offer price of 	₹195 currently in the year 	2016.
 	I imagined that time has shifted by 10 years (the year 2026) and the investor is still holding the
shares of HDFC Standard Life 	Insurance Company Limited that she bought in 2016 at 	₹195.
 	I imagined that over last 10 years (2016-2026) all the above assumptions about the future growth
of insurance sector and the resultant growth of HDFC Standard 	Life Insurance Company Limited,
have come true.
 	I imagined that HDFC Standard Life 	Insurance Company Limited is now listed on stock exchanges,
in the year 2026.
 	I also imagined that HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited is being valued at similar
levels at which other established HDFC group companies like HDFC Limited and HDFC Bank
Limited, are trading, after showing decades of sustained good business performance.
With all these imaginations in my mind, I 	thought about the kind of 	returns the investor would have made
as a long term 	investor in HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited.
It required some simple mathematical calculations, as below:
 	HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited grows its 	earnings at an 	excellent rate (CAGR)
of 25%. It is seen that growth rates in excess of 25% are unsustainable over long periods of time
and growth, even for established brands, inevitably moderates to such reasonable levels of 20-25%.
Take the case of 	Hindustan Unilever Limited, which has grown by 11% over last 10 	years.
o 	Earnings per share (EPS) of HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited after 10
years: 3.93*(1.25)^10=₹36.60
 	HDFC Limited and HDFC Bank Limited are currently trading at consolidated P/E ratios of 17.75
and 22.74 respectively (data from screener at February 27, 2016). I assumed that HDFC Standard
Life Insurance Company Limited would trade at a P/E ratio of 23 after 10 years of consistent
growth.
o 	Therefore, HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited is assumed to be trading at a
price of 	₹841.80 in 2026 (=36.60*23)
 	I calculated the amount of return the 	investor would have made in terms of 	capital gains for holding
HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited for 10 	years:
o 	Unrealized capital gains: (841.80/195)^(1/10) = 15.7%
 	I assumed that HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited would be paying a dividend to
reward its shareholders for association. Its dividend yield is expected to be about 1-2%, in line with
other large cap stocks. HDFC Limited and HDFC Bank Limited have current dividend yields of
1.43% and 0.83% respectively.
o 	Assuming 1.3% of dividend yield provided total return (capital gains + dividends) of 17%
per annum (15.7% + 1.3%) for holding HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited
for 10 years

-- 76 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
76 |	76 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
An annual return of 17% over 10 years, is a respectable rate of return for any investor. I would be very
happy to earn a return of 17%, if it’s reasonably certain, over 10 years.
However, in life, especially in business and equity markets, environment changes very frequently. Well-
thought out assumptions fail to materialize and the 	growth shown in business models remains on excel only.
Let’s see what all could happen over upcoming years, which might prevent HDFC Standard Life Insurance
Company Limited to achieve a sustained formidable growth of 25% 	over next 10 years:
 	Current market leader, Life Insurance Corporation of India Limited (LIC), might reduce prices of
products, which are currently the costliest in the market and it prices them at 	par or below private	
competitors. (Nothing beats the assurance of sovereign guarantee for an insurance company as a
surety against payment default when claim needs to be paid. I would have chosen LIC over any
other company, if its premium for term life insurance plan would have been similar to other
players).
o 	this one step by LIC has the potential of deflating business models of many non-serious
players in life insurance sector and severely denting 	the growth rates of others.
 	Government’s ongoing drive toliberalize insurance sector in order to allow infusion of capital by
foreign players would make even relatively smaller Indian players who could tie up with strong
foreign partners, as formidable competitors to HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited.
It would make the achievement of sustained growth by HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company
Limited, difficult.
 	HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company Limited might suffer from human errors in leadership,
which may delay its growth plans by a 	few years.
 	Unpredictable regulators might come out with certain regulations over next 10 years, which 	might
slow down the business growth	 	Judicial activism/public interest litigations/NGOs might change the entire business environment
altogether, which might make even doing business, leave apart growth, difficult and put the entire
industry behind by a few years. Instances of coal block de-allocation, cancelling of 2G spectrum
are pertinent. Such events are becoming more and more frequent, which even though highly
beneficial for 	the industry, 	in the long 	run, might 	push the development back 	a few year when 	seen
in the perspective 	of investor’s 	investment horizon.
 	Sometimes, the challenges come from entirely unexpected events. Investors in Shale Gas industry
would never have seen the oil price slide coming, which has made many of the companies,
bankrupt.
Above instances try to highlight the fact that there can be many factors, which may be completely out of
control of HDFC Standard Life 	Insurance Company Limited that might impact its 	earnings growth rate over
next 10 years and 	consequently, it might grow at a rate lower than 	25%.
Similarly, there might be many factors, which might impact the valuation that market might be willing to
give to HDFC Standard Life Insurance 	Company Limited after 10 years:
 	The world might be falling apart again in 	2026 (assuming 8-10 years of bull-bear cycle)

-- 77 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
77 |	77 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
 	India might be falling apart after nonperformance of intervening government/opposition for next
10 years
 	We might elect a 	government, which deprioritizes private investment and promotes public spending
as a mode of economy’s growth
 	Foreign investors (FII/FDI) might have 	found some other 	destination/country, which offers better
potential than India
 	And not to forget, the 	government might tax long-term capital gains from stock markets
There can be many more reasons to believe that the market situations might change and HDFC Standard
Life Insurance Company Limited might not be able to command a P/E ratio of 23 after 10 years.
It is evident that the 	business and market valuation assumptions might not sustain as discussed above in the
calculation of expected total return of 17% per annum, by holding shares of HDFC 	Standard Life Insurance
Company Limited over 10 years.
Therefore, it becomes pertinent that we should do a sensitivity analysis of the total return that an investor
would earn over varying situations of earnings growth rate that HDFC Standard Life Insurance Company
Limited might achieve over next 10 years and 	the valuation level that market might be willing to assign its
shares after 10 years.
We get the 	following table on doing the sensitivity analysis (with a 	constant dividend yield of 1.3% assumed
earlier):
The table reflects the precarious situation, which an investor puts herself into, by buying stocks at a high
price of 50 times the earnings (P/E ratio) in the first place.
 	If the annual sustained business/earnings growth rate achieved by HDFC Standard Life Insurance
Company Limited over next 10 years is less than 15% (which in itself if a very good growth rate

-- 78 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
78 |	78 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
to achieve), then even if the 	market values it at a 	P/E ratio of 25, the 	return of an investor would be
9%.
o 	Moreover, if the market 	decides to value HDFC Standard Life 	Insurance Company Limited
at a more reasonable P/E ratio of 15 (assuming PEG ratio of 1), then the return to the
investor would be mere 3%, which is less than the returns provided by a savings account
(offers 4%, tax-free up to 	₹10,000 per year and after that 2.8% assuming highest tax rate
of 30%).
 	Similarly, an investor can see that if the market decides to value HDFC Standard Life Insurance
Company Limited at a P/E ratio of 15 or lower, then even if 	it achieves spectacular growth rates of
25% per annum continuously for next 10 years, 	then its return would be modest (12% or 	lower)
 	And importantly, despite a healthy profitable growth rate of 10%, the investment might become
loss making for the investor if the 	market does not value HDFC Standard Life 	Insurance Company
Limited at a P/E ratio of about 20.
This scenario analysis clearly depicts that by initially purchasing the stock at a high P/E ratio of 50, the
investor has put many odds against herself. For 	her to make a 	respectable return and beat the return offered
by fixed 	income instruments 	in India, 	her 	selected company 	must grow 	its earnings 	at 	a rate 	higher than
20% per annum and the market must value this company at a P/E 	multiple of more than 20. Otherwise, she
might be better off investing in a 	fixed instrument and have peace of 	mind while sleeping.
Such a situation reminds me of a runner, who has to keep running on the treadmill at a high speed of
20km/hour for 10 years and the selection committee (market) must recognize her efforts (assigning
valuation levels), otherwise it might not be a 	very happy ending. This becomes a 	very stressful situation for
the runner and increases the chances of injury. The margin of error here is very low.
All this hard work and 	stress can be avoided, if the 	investor can take care of one 	simple thing:
Let’s assume the investor finds a company, which is hitherto unknown and growing at a goo	d pace with
sustained profitability, is conservatively financed and is available at a 	cheap valuation (assume P/E ratio of
10).
Now, let’s see how the total returns (including 	a dividend yield of 1.3% discussed earlier) to the investor
would look like in different scenarios of earnings growth rate over next 10 years and the valuation levels
assigned by the market at the end of 10 years:

-- 79 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
79 |	79 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
An investor would notice that if she does not overpay (i.e. buys at a P/E ratio of 10 in this case), then even
if the company achieves an earnings growth rate of 10% per annum over next 10 years and the market
assigns the company a P/E ratio of 10, she would make a total return of 11%, which is equal to returns
offered by the most attractively priced creditable fixed return instruments in 	India.
Any scenario of a higher earnings growth rate over next 10 years and any valuation level higher than P/E
ratio of 10, would bring positive surprises for the 	investor.
Earnings growth rate of 20% and P/E ratio of 	20, which was essential to beat the fixed income instruments
earlier (when the initial purchase price was at P/E ratio of 	50), would now give the investor an annual total
return of 30%!!
From the above analysis, an investor would appreciate that she can turn the odds of the stock market in her
favour if she decides never to overpay for her stocks. She should avoid buying stocks at high P/E ratio,
however attractive the story may seem. Instead, she should spend time in finding out companies that are
growing at a decent pace with sustained profitability, are conservatively financed and are yet to be
recognized by the markets.
The hard work spent in 	finding out such hidden opportunities can tilt the odds in her favour. She can 	remain
assured that even the modest sustained growth in the earnings and any recognition of her stock pick by
established brokerage houses/institutional investors, would bring very 	pleasant rewards to 	her portfolio.
I always advise investors to focus more on the initial stock selection by finding good companies at an
attractive price. It’s like a treasure hunt. However, once the investor has invested in such a company, then
she can sleep peacefully over many future years. She can keep adding to her such stocks at every decline
with the assurance that the game of the markets is now tilted in her favour.
No wonder, in markets, many renowned 	investors have stressed:

-- 80 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
80 |	80 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Never overpay for a stock.	Never overpay for a stock.
Or	Or
Well begun, half done.	Well begun, half done.
I would summarize it by 	saying that
“Buy good stocks cheap and get peaceful sleep”.	“Buy good stocks cheap and get peaceful sleep”.
An investor might think that if a stock is fundamentally sound, then the market would have already
recognized it and it would no longer be available at low P/E ratio. The investor would not be wrong with
this assumption. However, over time markets have proven that good quality stocks especially, the ones with
low market capitalization, can remain hidden from institutional radar for prolonged periods of time. No
wonder that entrepreneurial investors have been able to find attractive investment opportunities in the
markets at cheap valuations.
On the contrary, the investor might also think that any stock would be available at a low P/E ratio only
when it has certain problems and it might deserve low P/E ratio. The investor is not entirely wrong in this
assumption also as low P/E segment is the area which contains almost entire junkyard of stock markets.
However, it is this same low P/E segment, where hidden opportunities exist, which have the potential of
providing good returns to investors.
I believe that the common perception of high P/E stocks being safe and low P/E stocks being risky, is the
very reason that entrepreneurial investors are 	able to find good investment opportunities in different market
situations.
Moreover, an investor does not 	need to find a 	lot of such opportunities of fundamentally sound companies
available at attractive prices. Experiences of notable investors have shown that a handful of such companies
over the lifetime of the investor, are sufficient to create significant wealth for her. I 	believe that if an investor
is able to one such stock every one or two years, then it is 	more than sufficient for getting good returns from
stock markets.
To conclude, I believe that an investor should focus on finding fundamentally sound companies available
at low P/E ratio and avoid buying companies with high P/E ratio. If an investor is able to follow this
approach and find a handful of stocks over her lifetime, then she could expect to have the 	odds of the market
turned in her favour. In 	this way, she can expect 	to generate significant wealth from stock markets without
losing her peaceful sleep.

-- 81 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
81 |	81 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Investing in low price to earnings ratio (P/E ratio) stocks has been around for about a century now. Its most
ardent proponent, Benjamin Graham, has been one the 	best stock investors of all times. He introduced low
P/E ratio as one of 	the founding principles of value investing school. Graham’s major focus was to find out
stocks, which were selling at a 	discount to their fair value. Such stocks present an 	opportunity to earn good
returns while exposing the investor to low risk. He pointed out that these stocks can 	be easily found among
stocks trading at a low 	P/E ratio.
I was introduced to value investing and low P/E stocks in 2008 when I read The Intelligent Investor by
Benjamin Graham. I was highly impressed with Graham’s teachings & the value investing approach to
stock investing. I found a perfect match between my investing aspirations and the principles of value
investing. Thereafter, I left technical analysis and started following the fundamental analysis of stock
investing.
Graham stressed on two vital principles for stock investors: 1) never overpay for any stock and 2) always
keep a sufficient margin of 	safety while investing.
Upon years of stock analysis, I realized 	that the stocks, which satisfy Graham’s two principles, are
invariably the stocks that trade at P/E ratios < 10. These stocks offer great return potential to an investor
along with a high margin of safety. I have been investing in low P/E stocks since last 8 years and it has
served me well. It has helped me get pleasant returns from my portfolio.
Low P/E stocks have always been referred as risky investments by investors and stock proponents. Their
arguments are not entirely wrong because low P/E ratio is the area, 	which in addition to exciting investing
opportunities, also contains the entire junkyard of the stock market.
Low P/E ratio segment contains stocks, which are excellent businesses, growing at a fast pace with good
business 	advantage 	& efficient management but currently 	in the 	nascent 	stage 	of their life cycle. 	Such 	stocks
are yet to be recognized by general market participants and therefore, available at low valuations. On the
contrary, this segment also contains stocks that have poor business fundamentals, running in losses and
have questionable management that has eroded wealth of shareholders over the 	years.
Therefore, the key to benefiting from low P/E ratio stocks is to separate the wheat from the chaff. 	Selecting
good stocks in this segment is a 	treasure hunt where hard work spent is 	well rewarded.
Graham believed that the prevalent notion of 	undertaking higher risk being necessary for expecting higher
returns is a myth. He believed that expectation of returns depends upon the intelligent effort put in by the
investors. Graham said that market inefficiencies provide many opportunities for earning high returns by
taking minimal risk provided the investors do the hard work of 	identifying them.
I believe that low P/E 	stocks (P/E <10), if selected after 	detailed analysis offer a unique opportunity of high
return with low risk for the investor.

-- 82 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
82 |	82 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Examples of investments in two companies: Mayur 	Uniquoters Ltd. & Vinati Organics Ltd. (Vinati), which
I bought in January 2012 and February 2012 at low P/E ratio, after my due diligence, are very pertinent
here:
Initial Purchase Details	Initial Purchase Details 	Mayur Uniquoters	Mayur Uniquoters 	Vinati Organics	Vinati Organics
(Split/bonus adjusted) 	Jan-12	Jan-12 	Feb-12	Feb-12
EPS for last 12 months (INR) (E) 	6.4 	10.4
Share Price (INR) (P) 	42 	80
P/E ratio	P/E ratio 	6.6	6.6 	7.7	7.7
Both Mayur Uniquoters and Vinati have provided excellent returns in my portfolio (analysis done in
January 2015):
Based on my experience in stock markets since 2006, I have realized that low P/E stocks, if selected after
proper due 	diligence, offer the 	much aspired combination of 	high returns with low 	risk. Let us 	see which
features of low P/E 	stocks make it possible:

-- 83 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
83 |	83 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Graham introduced a novel concept of Margin of Safety (MoS) in his book The Intelligent Investor. The
margin of safety compared the earnings yield (EY) of a stock with the yield on government securities
(GSec) or treasury securities. Earnings Yield (EY) is calculated as 	the ratio of earnings per share 	(EPS) and
current market price (CMP) of any share.
EY=EPS/CMP	EY=EPS/CMP
The Margin of 	Safety implies that the higher the earnings yield from 	government securities (GSec)/Treasury
Yield, the safer is the 	stock investment.
To illustrate, suppose the investor buys a stock of company ABC Ltd at 	₹100. If EPS of ABC Ltd is 	₹10
then P/E ratio would be 	10 and the EY would be 	1/10 or 10%. As current GSec 	yield is about 8%, ABC Ltd
is a good investment. Suppose, after the investor buys ABC 	stock, its price falls and becomes 	₹50, then the
P/E ratio would become 5 and the 	EY would become 1/5 i.e. 20%. EY of 	20% would attract more and more
investors to shift money from bonds markets and use it to buy ABC stock as it yields 20% against GSec
yield of 8%. This new demand for ABC stock will increase its stock price and limit the downfall. This
forms the 	basis of 	Graham’s assumption that 	the 	higher the 	difference between EY 	and 	GSec/Treasury
yield, higher is the Margin of Safety.
Mayur Uniquoters at P/E ratio of 6.6, offered EY of 15%, which is 	significantly higher than prevalent GSec
yield of about 8%. Similarly, Vinati at P/E ratio of 7.7, offered EY 	of 13%, which again is higher than the

-- 84 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
84 |	84 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
GSec yield. Thus, both Mayur Uniquoters and Vinati offered a very good margin of safety in terms of
Benjamin Graham and 	thus, represented low-risk investment opportunities.
Most of the low P/E stocks are small to mid-cap companies that are yet to be recognized by market
participants or large cap companies that are facing trouble and hence, currently, out of favour.
I prefer finding small to mid-cap companies, which show good financial, business, valuation and
management strengths and invest in them with a long-term horizon. Such companies have proved to be
excellent investments because of 	many subsequent underlying developments, which work in the investor’s
favour:
If the selected low P/E companies have a sustainable business advantage and continue growing at good
pace, 	then 	these 	companies 	are 	recognized 	by 	other 	market 	participants 	like 	equity 	research 	firms.
Stockbrokers put these companies in their coverage list and publish regular reports about them. Such
coverage brings these companies to the notice of other investors and increases the demand for 	their shares.
The sustained good business performance of Mayur Uniquoters and Vinati Organics has been recognized
by research 	firms. Both these 	companies 	are currently 	being 	tracked 	by research 	firms 	like HDFC 	Securities
& Edelweiss among many others. Because of the reports of these firms, many investors now know about
the good performance of these 	companies, which has led to increased demand 	for their shares.
Sustained good business performance by these companies is also recognized by credit rating agencies.
Rating agencies upgrade credit rating of their debt facilities, which leads to lower cost of debt for these
companies, which is good for their future business prospects. Apart from 	the lower cost of debt, improving
credit ratings bring these companies under the radar of many institutional investors who start to look at
these companies as 	potential investment opportunities.
During 2012-2015, Mayur Uniquoters was upgraded twice by CARE Ltd from A to A+ (October 2012)
and from A+ to AA- (October 2014). Similarly, Vinati Organics was upgraded by CARE Ltd from A- to A
(August 2014). These rating upgrades have improved the business prospects for Mayur Uniquoters and
Vinati Organics.
Increased coverage by research firms, upgrade of ratings by credit rating agencies are some of the factors
that bring good performing low P/E companies in the notice of institutional investors. Once convinced of
the business advantage of such companies, some institutional investors buy shares of these companies.
Once such a company features in the portfolio of one institutional investor, other big investors who track
peer portfolios get enticed to these companies and a cycle of investments starts.

-- 85 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
85 |	85 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
During 2012-2015, both Mayur Uniquoters and Vinati Organics witnessed increasing investments by
institutional investors:
Shareholding Pattern (%)	Shareholding Pattern (%)
Mayur Uniquoters	Mayur Uniquoters 	Vinati Organics	Vinati Organics
Dec-12	Dec-12 	Dec-14	Dec-14 	Dec-12	Dec-12 	Dec-14	Dec-14
Promoters 	75.0 	66.4 	75.0 	72.3
Institutional Investors	Institutional Investors 	0.3	0.3 	11.9	11.9 	2.1	2.1 	6.5	6.5
Others 	24.7 	21.7 	23.0 	21.3
Total 	100.0 	100.0 	100.0 	100.0
Potential of P/E expansion is the single most important factor that 	leads to good returns for investors in low
P/E stocks. Increased demand for their shares by institutional investors & other market participants
increases the premium on their shares 	and thereby the P/E ratio rises.
During 2012-2015, both Mayur Uniquoters and Vinati Organics witnessed a significant increase in their
P/E ratios. P/E ratio of Mayur Uniquoters increased from 6.6 to 33.7 	and Vinati Organics from 7.7 to 24.5.
Mayur Uniquoters	Mayur Uniquoters 	Vinati Organics	Vinati Organics
(Split/bonus adjusted) 	Jan-12	Jan-12 	Jan-15	Jan-15 	Feb-12	Feb-12 	Jan-15	Jan-15
EPS for last 12 months 	6.4 	14.6 	10.4 	20.7
Share Price 	42 	490 	80 	508
P/E ratio	P/E ratio 	6.6	6.6 	33.7	33.7 	7.7	7.7 	24.5	24.5
P/E expansion is the major factor resulting in significant returns for an investor, apart from continued
earnings growth. The below table shows that out of the annualized returns (IRR) provided by Mayur
Uniquoters and Vinati Organics, a huge portion is because of 	P/E ratio expansion:
Trailing 12 months EPS	Trailing 12 months EPS
(INR)	(INR)
Stocks Return	Stocks Return
(IRR)	(IRR) 	Contribution of P/E expansion	Contribution of P/E expansion
Dec-12	Dec-12 	Dec-14	Dec-14 	CAGR (A)	CAGR (A) 	(B)	(B) 	C = B-A	C = B-A
Mayur Uniquoters 	6.4 	14.6 	32% 	136% 	104%	104%
Vinati Organics 	10.4 	20.7 	27% 	143% 	116%	116%

-- 86 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
86 |	86 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We can see that 	out of annualized returns (IRR) of 	136% generated by Mayur Uniquoters, earnings growth
contributed only 32% and P/E 	expansion contributed whopping 104%. Similarly, for Vinati Organics, out
of annualized return (IRR) of 	143%, earnings growth contributed only 27% and P/E expansion contributed
116%.
For Mayur Uniquoters, P/E expansion accounted for 75% (102/136) of total returns and for Vinati Organics,
P/E expansion accounted for 81% (116/143) of total returns. Therefore, we 	can see that more 	than 75% of
the total returns generated by Mayur Uniquoters and Vinati Organics are 	due to P/E expansion.
Capital gains from a stock investment come from the 	growth 	of company’s earnings and expansion of P/E
ratio. If a company’s growth potential is well 	recognized in the stock market, then its share price already
factors in future growth potential. Shares of such companies usually trade at high P/E ratios (>20) and scope
of future P/E expansion is minimal. If an investor, buys shares of such companies then the contribution
from future P/E expansion is very low or nil. On the contrary, if high P/E ratio companies, due to any
reason, are not able to match market’s expectation of growth rate, then their P/E ratio decreases and the
investor can suffer a 	greater risk of capital loss.
If an investor had 	invested in Mayur Uniquoters and Vinati Organics at P/E ratio 	of 25-30, then she 	would
have potentially, got the returns of 32% and 27% respectively, solely due to their earnings growth. She
would have missed the contribution of P/E expansion on her investments, which is a very significant
component of overall return.
Moreover, according to Benjamin Graham, the stocks with high P/E ratio have low earnings yield (EY),
which is well below the GSec/Treasury Yield. Therefore, stocks with high P/E ratio offer low Margin of
Safety and in turn, 	entail higher risk than stocks with low P/E ratio.
Therefore, I believe that stocks with 	high P/E ratio offer limited return 	with high risk. Stocks of companies
with low P/E ratio offer potential of 	high returns at low risk.

-- 87 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
87 |	87 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
However, low P/E ratio should not be the only criteria for selecting a stock for buying. Investors should
focus on finding a conservatively financed, fast growing company available at low P/E ratio. The company
should be a fundamentally strong company, which is yet to 	be recognized by the market. 	It has to meet all
the criteria of the 	checklist for buying a stock.
An investor has to tread very carefully while investing in low P/E stocks. As mentioned earlier, this is the
segment where the entire junk of stock market is present. If an investor were too enamored by low P/E as
the only criteria, she may end up owning poor quality stocks that might lead 	to loss her entire capital.
However, if the investor applies all the criteria of 	financial, business & industry, management and valuation
analysis on the shortlisted stocks and then selects the stock to buy, she would be able to find the winners.
It is a treasure hunt!
Additionally, the investor must not forget 	the equally important process of 	regular monitoring of stocks in
her portfolio.
The sequence of events of recognition by other market participants and P/E expansion might not happen
immediately after an investor buys a low P/E stock. It might take years before market responds to the good
business performance of stocks. However, until then, an investor 	should show 	patience and enjoy the fruits
of dividends.

-- 88 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
88 |	88 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Deciding about the valuation level of any company at which an investor buys its stock is one of the key
aspects of stock analysis. It is said 	that even a very good 	company if bought at an overvalued price, might
not prove to be a good investment. Therefore, every investor while analysing stocks for investment keeps
on continuously asking herself, whether the current price presents an attractive valuation opportunity or
whether she might get stuck in 	an overvalued stock if she buys the 	stock at current prices.
There are many parameters, which are 	used by different investors to assess the valuation levels of any stock	
at a given price. A few of these parameters are 	listed below:
1. 	Price to Earnings ratio (P/E ratio)
2. 	P/E to Growth ratio (PEG ratio)
3. 	Earnings Yield (EY)
4. 	Price to Book value ratio (P/B ratio)
5. 	Price to Sales ratio (P/S ratio)
6. 	Dividend Yield (DY)
7. 	EV/EBITDA
Every investor has her own favourite valuation ratios, which she determines based on her own experience
and preferences. I prefer 	using the price to earnings ratio (P/E ratio) 	as the valuation level for determining
the attractiveness of a given stock price 	of any company.
P/E ratio is the most 	widely used parameter to analyse whether the stock of any 	company is overvalued or
undervalued at any point in time. It is 	calculated by dividing the current market price (CMP) of a 	stock by
profit/earnings 	per share 	(EPS). It represents the price an investor pays 	to buy 	₹1 of earnings of a company.
The current chapter is an attempt to help the reader tread 	on a guiding path to determine the right price i.e.
P/E ratio to be paid for a stock. This chapter attempts to determine a few of the factors that influence the
P/E ratio of the stock and 	tries to bring some objectivity to the approach of 	determining the right P/E ratio
that the investor might be willing to pay for 	the stock.
The chapter would focus on the key criteria that an investor should look at while deciding about the P/E
ratio (premium or discount) that she may pay for any company. These criteria would help her in deciding
about the maximum P/E that she may pay for a company, which she has initially bought at very attractive
levels but the stock has now increased in price and P/E ratio. This would also help her in deciding her
strategy for accumulating stocks which are already existing in her 	portfolio.
Among all the multitude of factors that influence the potential purchase price (P/E ratio) of any stock, we
believe that there are three primary factors:
1. 	Prevailing interest rate in the economy
2. 	Competitive advantage (moat) enjoyed by the company
3. 	Circle of competence of the 	investor

-- 89 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
89 |	89 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Let’s now delve deeper into each of these factors to assess how they influence the potential purchase price
of any stock for the 	investor:
The prevailing interest rate in the economy influence the 	stock prices as well as the underlying business of
the companies in a significant manner.
Investor always compare expected returns from stocks with the alternatives available to them. One of the
key alternative asset class available to all the investors is debt funds, whose return depends a lot on the
prevailing 	interest 	rates. 	As 	interest 	rates 	fall, 	the 	returns 	from 	debt 	funds 	decline 	and 	they 	lose 	their
attractiveness to investors. As a result, a lot of investors shift their money to stock markets and are ok to
accept comparative lower returns from stock markets until the time such returns are sufficient to beat the
yields on debt funds. 	It results in investors willing to pay higher 	prices to same stocks, 	which they otherwise
would not have paid.
On the contrary, if interest rates are high, then investors have debt funds as a readily available alternate
asset class giving them good returns. In such a scenario, attractive by the perceived certainty of returns from
debt funds, a lot of investors withdraw funds from equity markets as they are unwilling to take the risk
associated with stocks and as a 	result, they are unwilling to hold the 	stocks at higher prices. It results in the
stock prices, in general, getting depressed at the 	times of high-interest rates.
Moreover, low-interest rates lead to 	easier and cheaper availability of credit/loans to companies 	and in turn
help them grow and post 	good results/profits. This leads to a lot of investors buying stocks and taking their
prices 	high 	in 	low-interest 	rate 	situations. 	The 	reverse 	happens 	when 	interest 	rates 	are 	high. 	Profits 	of
companies decline and the investors push the stock prices lower.
In an attempt to bring an objectivity to this influence of interest rates on the economy, the chapter delves
into the concept of margin of 	safety put forward by Benjamin Graham in 	his book: The Intelligent Investor.
The discussion below uses Earnings Yield as a factor to determine the margin of safety and the resultant
P/E ratio that an 	investor should target for any stock.
Earnings Yield (EY) is calculated as the inverse of Price to Earnings (P/E) ratio i.e. E/P ratio. It is 	calculated
by dividing the earnings per share (EPS) with the current market price (CMP).
EY provides an idea about the earning/returns that a stock would produce for every 	₹1 invested by the
buyer in it.
Benjamin Graham advised comparing the EY with Treasury Yield (USA). Similar yield to compare in India
is the ongoing yield on Government Securities (G-Sec). The higher the difference between EY and G-
Sec/Treasury Yield, the safer is 	the stock investment.

-- 90 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
90 |	90 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
To illustrate, suppose an investor buys a stock of company ABC Ltd at 	₹100. If EPS of ABC Ltd is 	₹10
then its P/E ratio would be 10 	(100/10) and its EY would be 1/10 or 	10%. As current G-Sec yield is about
7.50-8.00%, ABC Ltd is a good investment as per Graham’s criteria.
Suppose, after the investor buys the stock of ABC Ltd., its price falls to 	₹50, then the P/E ratio would
become 5 	and the 	EY would 	become 1/5 	i.e. 20%. 	EY of 	20% would attract 	more and 	more investors to
shift money from bonds markets 	and use it to buy 	stocks of ABC Ltd. as 	it provides an opportunity to invest
money at a yield of 20% against G-Sec yield of 8%. This new demand for stocks of ABC Ltd. would
increase its stock price and limit 	the downfall.
The higher the difference between EY and G-Sec/Treasury yield at the time of purchase of the stock, the
higher is the cushion in times of adversity i.e. higher Margin of Safety. Therefore, the stocks with higher
earnings yield (EY) i.e. the 	ones with low P/E ratio, 	would provide a higher cushion to 	the investor during
tough times.
Therefore, one benchmark that an investor might keep to determine the maximum P/E ratio to pay for the
purchasing the 	stock 	of 	any company 	can 	be 	derived from 	Government Securities 	(G-Sec 	Yield) 	or 	the
Treasury Yield.
1. 	If the 10 years G-Sec yield is	If the 10 years G-Sec yield is 	10%,	10%, 	then the investor may decide about the maximum P/E ratio to
be paid for a stock as 10 (i.e. 1/10%)
2. 	If the 10 years G-Sec yield declines to	If the 10 years G-Sec yield declines to 	8%,	8%, 	then the investor may be comfortable at paying a P/E
ratio of 12.5 (1/8%) for the 	stocks.
3. 	If the 10 years G-Sec yield rises to 12.5%,	If the 10 years G-Sec yield rises to 12.5%, 	then the investors should pay only a P/E 	ratio of 8 to
the stock (1/12.5%)
The chapter on assessing the margin of safety uses the above concept to determine the margin of safety
inherent in the purchase price of 	the stock.
The competitive advantage of any company, aka moat, helps it to protect its business, its market, and its
margins 	from 	competition. 	As 	a 	result, 	the 	company 	is 	able 	to 	generate 	higher 	sales 	growth,
sustained/improving profitability margins, significant free 	cash flows etc. for 	its shareholders.
Two concepts are used to determine the margin of safety in the 	business of a company. These two concepts
are:
1. 	Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR)
2. 	Free Cash Flows (FCF)
The current chapter utilizes these two concepts to determine whether the company has a competitive
advantage and deserves to be paid any premium in 	terms of a higher P/E ratio over 	and above the P/E ratio
arrived by using 10-year G-Sec yields discussed above.

-- 91 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
91 |	91 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR) is a 	measure of the growth potential inherent in the business model
of a company, which it can achieve using resources generated through its current profits without relying on
external sources of funds like debt or 	equity dilution.
Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR) utilizes 	the features of a company’s business model like net profit
margin (NPM), dividend payout ratio (DPR), depreciation (Dep) and net fixed asset turnover (NFAT) to
arrive at the sales 	growth rate that the company can achieve without leveraging itself.
The formula for calculating SSGR is:
SSGR = [(1-Dep) +	SSGR = [(1-Dep) + 	NFAT*NPM*(1-DPR)]	NFAT*NPM*(1-DPR)] 	–– 	11
It can be inferred from the above formula, the companies with higher profitability (NPM), operating
efficiency (high NFAT) and lower dividend payouts (DPR) would have higher self-sustainable growth rate
(SSGR).
An investor should compare the SSGR of the company with its current sales growth to see if there is any
margin of safety in the business of model of the company:
It means that the company’s business features (NPM, NFAT & DPR) allow it to grow its sales at a higher
rate than the current growth rate. In the case of economic downturn, the company can safely:
1. 	reduce its profitability to generate higher demand
2. 	reduce dividends to conserve funds to make additional investments and
3. 	invest in fixed assets to improve its plant 	& machinery/technology (leading to lower NFAT)
in an attempt to 	maintain its current sales growth rate.
All the above steps would provide funds from business activities and the company would not have to rely
on external sources like debt or equity dilution to get funds to maintain its current growth rate. Therefore,
the company with higher SSGR can increase their sales growth rate in normal times and maintain current
sales growth rate during tough times without leveraging their balance sheet by 	taking on debt.
This ability to sustain the growth rate in 	times of stress without impacting the returns to shareholders makes
such companies eligible to be paid a premium while purchasing their stocks. Investors may choose to pay
a premium over the P/E ratio arrived at after considering ongoing 10 years G-Sec yield, to purchase these
companies that have SSGR above sales growth rate.
Let us see the examples of companies, which have SSGR higher than their 10 years sales growth rate:

-- 92 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
92 |	92 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
VST Tiller Tractors Limited	VST Tiller Tractors Limited
VST Tiller Tractors Limited has an SSGR of more than 45%, whereas it is growing its sales at an annual
rate of 15%-17%. SSGR data indicates that the company can grow at a rate much higher than its current
sales growth without requiring outside capital in terms of debt/equity dilution. No wonder that the company
has shown very healthy growth without raising any debt.
Tide Water Oil Co. (India) Limited	Tide Water Oil Co. (India) Limited
Tide Water Oil Co. (India) Limited has an SSGR of more than 55%, whereas it is growing its sales at an
annual rate of 12%-15%. SSGR data indicates that the company can grow at a rate much higher than its
current sales growth without requiring outside capital in terms of 	debt/equity dilution. No wonder that 	Tide
Water Oil Co. (India) 	Limited has shown very healthy growth without raising any debt.

-- 93 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
93 |	93 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We can see that the companies like VST Tiller Tractors Limited and Tide Water Oil Co. (India) Limited,
which have SSGR higher than their 10 years 	sales growth are able to sustain their growth without leveraging
their balance sheets. In the case 	of economic downturn, these companies can decide to reduce profitability
to generate higher demand, 	reduce dividends to conserve funds to make 	additional investments and invest
in fixed assets to improve its plant & machinery/technology to maintain their current sales growth rate.
In the case of such companies, an investor may choose to pay a premium (higher P/E ratio) over and above
the P/E ratio arrived at 	after considering ongoing 10 years G-Sec yield.
The premium that an investor might decide to pay for such companies is a personal preference. However,
while making investments, I keep a rough guideline of a premium of incremental P/E ratio of 1 for every
10% cushion of SSGR over the 10 years sales growth.
(Please note that this is a 	very rough guideline for calculating the amount of premium in terms of P/E ratio
of which is yet 	to be established by any statistical estimates).
The investor would notice that such companies are already growing more than their 	business potential. Such
companies usually rely on raising debt or diluting their equity to generate funds needed for investments to
generate the sales growth.
These companies usually grow at a sales growth rate which is much higher than their business potential
(SSGR). The result is that these companies have to consistently raise debt/dilute equity to raise funds for
investments to generate the growth, as their operational business is not able 	to generate required amount of
funds.
Let us see the examples of companies, which have SSGR lower than their 10 years sales growth rate:
Pratibha Industries Limited	Pratibha Industries Limited

-- 94 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
94 |	94 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Pratibha Industries Limited has been growing its sales at a growth rate of about 28%-38% over last 10
years, however, its business model indicates that in 	the current situation it is not able 	to sustain any growth
beyond 5% 	from inherent 	sources in 	the business as 	its SSGR 	is almost 	1%-5%. Pratibha 	Industries 	Limited
has to raise almost the 	entire amount of funds to support its 	growth from additional sources like debt.
It is not surprising that Pratibha Industries Limited has witnessed its debt increase from 	₹50 cr. in 	FY2006
to 	₹2,283 cr. in FY2015.
Jai Prakash Power Ventures Limited	Jai Prakash Power Ventures Limited
Jai Prakash Power Ventures Limited has been growing its sales at a growth rate of about 35%-45% over
last 10 years, however, its 	business model indicates that in the current situation it is not 	able to sustain any
growth from inherent sources in the business as its SSGR is almost 0%. Jai 	Prakash Power Ventures Limited
has to raise almost the 	entire amount of funds to support its 	growth from additional sources like debt.
It is not 	surprising that Jai Prakash Power Ventures Limited has witnessed its debt 	increase from 	₹1,081 cr.
in FY2006 to 	₹22,901 cr. in FY2015 and recently has 	to resort to selling its assets to repay 	its lenders.
An investor would notice that the companies that grow at a rate higher than what their business model can
fund have to face 	stress going ahead when the debt burden 	increases to unsustainable levels.
An investor might feel that she may invest in such companies by buying them at a discount to the P/E ratio
arrived at after considering ongoing 10 years G-Sec yield, just as she decided to buy the companies with
SSGR higher than sales 	growth at a premium. However, 	it is advised that the 	investor should avoid investing
her hard earned money in such companies and try to find out other opportunities where companies are
growing within their SSGR.

-- 95 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
95 |	95 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
As described in the chapter on margin of safety: 3 Simple Ways to Assess "Margin of Safety": The
Cornerstone of Stock Investing, I believe that free cash flow (FCF) is the ultimate measure of 	investibility
of any company.
It is calculated as the 	surplus cash with the company after meeting its 	capital expenditure requirements.
FCF = CFO	FCF = CFO 	–– 	Capex	Capex
Where,
 	CFO = cash flow from operations
 	Capex = capital expenditure including maintenance capex and capital work in 	progress (CWIP)
Capex for any year can be calculated as the difference between gross fixed assets (GFA) & CWIP at the
start of the year and end of the year. It can also be calculated by deducting net fixed assets & CWIP at the
start of the year from the net fixed assets & CWIP at end of the year and adding back the depreciation for
the year.
Capex:	Capex:
(GFA + CWIP) at the end of the year	(GFA + CWIP) at the end of the year 	–– 	(GFA + CWIP) at the start of the year	(GFA + CWIP) at the start of the year
OR	OR
(NFA + CWIP) at the end of the year	(NFA + CWIP) at the end of the year 	–– 	(NFA + CWIP) at the start of the year + Depreciation for	(NFA + CWIP) at the start of the year + Depreciation for
the year	the year
Free cash flow (FCF) is the most essential feature 	of any business as it amounts to 	the surplus/discretionary
cash that the business/company is able to generate for its shareholders. FCF is the 	equivalent of savings for
a household.
If we as households are not able to manage our expenses within our means of income, i.e. are not able to
save anything, then our financial health is going to suffer a lot in future. We would have to borrow from
relative/banks etc. to meet our requirements. The debt, which we raise to fund our expenses, needs to be
paid at predefined intervals 	irrespective of the fact whether 	we are able 	to save in 	future/have our 	job intact
or not. The debt 	pressure increases the bankruptcy risk and leads to stress in our 	lives.
The scenario is exactly the same for companies as well.
If a company does not have positive free cash flow, it means that it is spending beyond its means. Such a
company would have to raise funds from additional sources like debt or equity dilution to meet its
requirements. These funds, if raised 	from debt, would decrease profitability by interest expense and 	increase
bankruptcy risk and if raised from equity, would lead to dilution of the stake of existing shareholders.

-- 96 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
96 |	96 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
In both the cases, the situation of companies continuously raising debt/equity to meet their cash flow
requirements becomes less attractive for investors as compared 	to the companies that are 	able to meet their
fund requirements from their cash flow from operations.
It might be argued that the investments done today by the 	company would lead to revenue & profits in the
future and would generate wealth for 	the shareholders.
This argument is a valid argument just like an educational loan for an individual. An education funded by
the loan is an investment, which has the potential of increasing the skills set, earnings ability and future
wealth of a person and 	therefore is considered a good investment.
Similarly, for companies the investments in plants & 	machinery and technology is like an educational loan,
which increases future earnings potential. Therefore, we should worry about a situation where a company
is not able to generate positive FCF for a few year. Such companies might be taking education loans to
generate future wealth. However, if a company is not able to generate positive FCF over long periods of
time (I assess them over 	last 10 years), then the 	company resembles a continuous cash guzzling machine.
It resembles an individual who is continuously garnering degrees after degrees costing millions of
rupees/dollar, without ever putting those skills to commercial use. Or those degrees might be fake and cash
has already gone down the drain! In both the cases, the investment done is not of much use.
I, as a 	shareholder, expect the companies I own, to 	be cash generating machines. Their business should be
a source of cash for me and not the other way round. Therefore, positive free cash flow generation by a
company over last 10 years, is one of the key criteria for stock selection for me.
Once an investor has identified a company with positive cash flow, then she should further analyse what
proportion of 	cash flow 	from operations (CFO) over last 10 	years, it 	has used 	in capital 	expenditure (capex)
and what proportion is available as free cash flow (FCF%).
I find that the companies, which have achieved their sales growth in the 	past by using the minimum amount
of CFO as capex have a significantly higher margin of safety over the companies which have used almost
all CFO. Needless to say, the companies, which have their capex much higher than their entire CFO over
last 10 years (i.e. negative FCF), have very low/negative margin of safety.
An illustration:
Let’s take an example of two similar sized companies (A & B) growing their sales at a similar rate (say
15%) in the past. Let’s assume that both the companies A & B, generatedthe same amount of CFO over
last 10 years (say 	₹100 cr).
Let’s assume that on analysing the capex done by these companies in last 10 years, we find company A has	
achieved the sales growth (15%) by doing a capex of 	₹50 cr (50% of CFO), thereby, generating an FCF of
₹50 cr. On 	the contrary, we find that the company B has achieved the same 	sales growth (15%) by doing a
capex of 	₹100 cr (100% of CFO), thereby, generating NIL FCF.

-- 97 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
97 |	97 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
When the tough times strike the economy in future, the 	profitability of companies would decline, customers
would delay the payment of cash, suppliers would ask for immediate cash and the credit from all sources
would become costly.
In such a situation, company A, whose business model permitted it to achieve the sales growth by using
only 50% of CFO in 	the past, would be able to bear 	the impact of reducing cash inflows as customers cancel
their orders, squeeze profit margins and delay the payments. Theoretically, company A can tolerate its
profitability and cash collections (CFO) declining by 50%, before signs of stress start becoming visible in
its business operations & 	planned investments.
On the other hand, company B, which was already investing 100% of its CFO to generate its sales, would
find even the slightest decline in its cash flow (CFO), impacting its operations. Declining orders, reduced
profitability 	and 	delayed 	payments 	from 	customers 	would 	make 	it 	difficult 	for 	company 	B 	to 	make
payments 	to 	its 	suppliers 	and 	do 	planned 	investments. 	Company 	B 	would 	have 	to 	rely 	on 	additional
debt/equity raising to fund its 	cash requirements.
If there is another company C, which was already using more than 100% of its CFO in capex, thereby
having negative free cash flow (FCF). Such 	a company would already be sagging down under a lot 	of debt
burden. In 	the tough 	economic situation described 	above, company C 	would find 	difficult to 	continue its
business operations as usual as sources of cash dry up. The additional debt, which was essential to sustain
its business model, would become further costly.
Companies like C are prime candidates for bankruptcy in tough times as they find it difficult to service
exiting debt, make payments to suppliers. Such 	companies, usually being capex heavy and operating at 	low-
profit margins, find 	it difficult to 	garner additional 	business by reducing their profitability as it 	would push
them into losses. Such companies rarely have 	any margin of safety built in 	their business model.
Let’s see the examples of some of the companies from the perspective of FCF and try to determine if they
deserve any premium in terms of P/E ratio over and 	above the P/E ratio arrived at after considering ongoing
10 years G-Sec yield.

-- 98 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
98 |	98 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Atul Auto Limited	Atul Auto Limited
Over last 10 years (FY2006-15), Atul Auto Limited has generated cash flow from operations (CFO) of
₹168 cr. whereas it 	needed to invest only 	₹88 cr. in its 	business and thereby leaving 	₹80 cr. (48%) in hand
of the company as discretionary cash to reward its shareholders. No wonder, the company could provide
dividends to the tune of 	₹35 cr. over last 	10 years despite remaining virtually debt free.
TTK Prestige Limited	TTK Prestige Limited
Over last 10 years (FY2006-15), TTK Prestige Limited has generated cash flow from operations (CFO) of
₹663 cr. whereas it needed to invest only 	₹385 cr. in its business and thereby leaving 	₹278 cr. (42%) in
hand of the company as discretionary cash to reward its shareholders. No wonder, the company could
provide dividends to 	the tune of 	₹156 cr. over last 10 years 	despite remaining virtually debt free.

-- 99 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
99 |	99 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We can see that the companies like Atul Auto Limited and TTK Prestige Limited, which have generated
positive 	free 	cash 	flows 	(FCF) 	are 	able 	to 	sustain their 	growth 	without leveraging 	their 	balance 	sheets.
During tough times, such companies can reduce prices of its products, offer higher credit period to its
customers, pay suppliers promptly to attract and retain quality suppliers without impacting its balance sheet.
These companies would not need to raise debt for such crisis strategies; only a slight reduction in the
dividend payouts to the shareholders would provide enough of money to fund the 	emergency measures.
In the case of such companies, an investor may choose to pay a premium (higher P/E ratio) over and above
the P/E ratio arrived at 	after considering ongoing 10 years G-Sec yield.
The premium that an investor might decide to pay for such companies is a personal preference. I believe
that any investible company must have positive FCF to the tune of 25%-30% of its CFO while using the
balance 70%-75% 	of CFO to fund 	a respectable sales growth. 	Therefore, while making investments, I keep
a rough guideline of a premium of incremental P/E ratio of 1 for every 10% cushion of FCF% above
minimum 25-30% for companies that have been growing their sales above 15% per annum for 	last 10 years.
(Please note that this is a 	very rough guideline for calculating the amount of premium in 	terms of P/E ratio
of which is yet 	to be established by any statistical estimates).
Now, let’s see some cases where companies have grown beyond their means (CFO) and have done more
capex than its 	inherent business strength permitted.
Bhushan Steel Limited	Bhushan Steel Limited
Over last 10 years (FY2006-15), Bhushan Steel Limited has generated cash flow from operations of
₹10,312 cr. However, its business required it to invest 	₹41,255 cr in the company, thereby eliminating any
chance of free cash flow. The company, on the contrary, had to raise debt to fund its capital expenditure
requirements. Total debt of the company increased from 	₹2,036 cr. in FY2006 to 	₹39,079 cr. in FY2015.

-- 100 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
100 |	100 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
If an investor analyses deeply, then 	she would notice that the entire 	dividend of 	₹97 cr., paid by the company
over last 10 years has been funded by debt.
National Fertilizers Limited	National Fertilizers Limited
Over last 10 years (FY2006-15), National Fertilizers Limited has generated negative cash flow from
operations of 	₹ 	(1,766) cr. However, its business required it to invest 	₹4,395 cr in the company, thereby
further deepening the negative cash flow position. The company, on 	the contrary, had to 	raise debt to fund
its capital expenditure requirements. Total debt of the company increased from 	₹227 cr. in FY2006 to
₹7,645 cr. in FY2015.
The investor would notice that the entire dividend of 	₹295 cr., paid by the 	company over last 10 years has
been funded by debt.
If the economic scenario deteriorates further, then companies like Bhushan Steel Limited and National
Fertilizers Limited would have to meet its cash requirements by raising further debt or equity. In case its
lenders or shareholders, do not provide this capital, then the company would face a difficult time to tide
over the crisis and may resort to selling assets to repay lenders 	or face bankruptcy.
Looking at the above situation, it is 	clear that companies like Bhushan Steel 	Limited and National Fertilizers
Limited do not have a 	significant margin of safety built into its business model.
An investor might feel that she may invest in such companies by buying them at a discount to the P/E ratio
arrived at after considering ongoing 10 years G-Sec yield, just as she decided to buy the companies with
positive free cash 	flow (FCF) at a premium. However, it is 	advised that 	the investor should avoid investing
her hard earned money in such companies and try to find out other opportunities where companies are
growing while maintaining a positive FCF.

-- 101 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
101 |	101 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The investor should note that positive FCF should be a necessity before considering any company for
investment and the fact that higher the FCF as a proportion of CFO, the higher the margin of safety.
An investor should prefer to invest in the companies, which are in her circle of competence i.e. the
companies where the investor understands the products, the markets, the 	management, the industry etc.
The investor should continuously try to expand her circle of competence by reading more and more about
companies and industries. It is one of 	the key requirements from a stock 	investor.
Investors usually have a lot of knowledge about companies that are:
 	from the industry in which the investor works
 	already part of investor’s portfolio where the investor had selected the company after doing
significant research
It is a known fact that the investors can take informed decisions about the companies that are within their
circle of competence and thus have a 	key advantage over other investors while deciding about investments
in these companies. This advantage is also a form of Margin of Safety.
I believe that in case the investor is not finding good opportunities in the markets at 	very attractive prices,
then she can pay a little premium to purchase stocks of companies in her circle of competence.
To illustrate, assuming an investor has a criteria of 	purchasing companies at a P/E ratio of 	10 or lower but
is not able to find any new company to add to the portfolio, which is priced at a P/E ratio of 10 or below,
then she may think of buying additional quantities of stocks already existing in her portfolio at a little
premium say 	P/E of 11. 	This is with the assumption that the investor has selected the 	stocks in 	her portfolio
by doing sufficient 	research and has been monitoring the stocks on a continuous basis 	and is well aware of
the management, business, products and markets of the 	companies in her portfolio.
With this, we come to an end of the current chapter, which focused on the key criteria that an investor
should look at while deciding about the P/E ratio 	that she may pay for 	any company. These criteria would
help her in deciding about the maximum P/E that she may pay for a 	company, which she has initially bought
at very attractive levels but the 	stock has now increased in price and 	P/E ratio. This might help the investor
in deciding her strategy for accumulating stocks which are 	already existing in her portfolio.
To summarize, the investor may use the following approach in determining the P/E ratio while buying a
stock:
1.1. 	Prevailing Interest Rate in the E	Prevailing Interest Rate in the Economy:	conomy:	1. 	The investor should use the 	10-year government securities (G-Sec) yield/treasury yield to
arrive at a benchmark P/E ratio at which she may decide to pay a premium or a discount

-- 102 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
102 |	102 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
depending on the other parameters about the 	company. Lower interest rates/yield scenarios
would lead to higher P/E ratios and 	vice versa.
2.2. 	Competitive Advantage (Moat) enjoyed by the	Competitive Advantage (Moat) enjoyed by the 	Company:	Company:
1. 	Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR): If the company has an SSGR, which is higher than
the last 10 years annual sales growth rate, then the 	investors may decide to pay a premium
over the P/E ratio arrived 	at after considering ongoing 10 years G-Sec yield, 	for buying the
stocks of the company.
i. 	The investor should avoid companies, which have SSGR much lower than the 10
years annual sales growth rate and as a result are growing beyond their business
potential by continuously raising debt.
2. 	Free Cash Flow% (FCF/CFO): An investor may decide to pay a premium over the 	P/E ratio
arrived at after considering ongoing 10 years G-Sec yield, for buying the stocks of the
companies which generate high free cash flow as a proportion to their cash flow from
operations (FCF/CFO).
i. 	The investor should avoid companies, which have negative free cash flows and are
funding their growth/normal business operations by raising debt.
3.3. 	Circle of Competence of the Investor:	Circle of Competence of the Investor:
1. 	In case the investor is not able to find any new stock, which is within her comfortable P/E
ratio range, then she may decide to pay a 	little premium to invest in stocks, which are within
her circle of competence. These stocks may be from the existing portfolio of the investor,
which she has selected after 	doing sufficient research or may be 	from the industry that the
investor knows thoroughly about.

-- 103 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
103 |	103 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Business & Industry Analysis (BIA) involves analyzing the current situation of the industry in which any
company operates and finding out the strengths of the company, which 	would help it grow its operations at
a faster pace in comparison to its competitors. It involves forming an opinion about whether the industry
would grow in future and within this industry, whether our company would be able to gain increasing
market share.
BIA is one of 	the most contentious areas of stock analysis. I have never seen any two persons agreeing upon
a common conclusion regarding industry & business prospects of any company or sector. If we take any
industry, say infrastructure, one analyst would say that infrastructure industry is going to grow as India has
a huge 	shortage of good infrastructure and Hon. Prime Minister’s vision has a significant focus on
infrastructure development, hence, infrastructure companies would generate good returns for investors. At
the same time, another analyst might say that 	most of existing infrastructure projects are stuck for approvals
and all infrastructure companies are reeling under huge debt, hence, by the time investment cycle would
revive, all these companies would have turned bankrupt.
There is never a shortage of divergent views in BIA. Therefore, the more an investor discusses BIA with
different people, the more she is going to get confused. Hence, 	it is advised that every investor should have
a fixed framework or checklist for conducting BIA for any stock. She should be guided by her
framework/checklist while conducting BIA and should not deviate much. Else, the risk of her getting lost
in the analysis 	is very high. Warren Buffett calls such situation as “Analysis Paralysis”. One should avoid
falling into the trap of analysis paralysis. I firmly believe that any investor who is willing to spend the
required time reading the basic books on investing & conducting stock analysis on her 	own would be able
to make her BIA framework/checklist within a few weeks of effort.
The usage of BIA in 	stock analysis depends on the stock investing approach being followed by the 	investor.
BIA is done only in 	fundamental analysis approach to stock selection. Technical analysis does not 	involve
BIA as the investor/trader following technical analysis is concerned only with the past prices and trading
volume data of the stock and is indifferent to whether the stock is a manufacturing, an agricultural or a
financial services company. Fundamental analysis of a stock involves understanding the underlying
business of a company, its products, customers, suppliers etc.
Even in the fundamental analysis approach, the importance of BIA depends on 	whether the investor follows
Top-Down or Bottom-Up approach:
If the investor follows Top-Down approach for stock selection, BIA would be the starting point of her
analysis. She would typically follow the EIC (Economy-Industry-Company) approach as detailed in the
previous 	chapters. 	She 	would 	first 	try 	to 	identify 	those 	economies 	(countries) 	of 	the 	world, 	which 	are
expected to grow at a faster pace than other economies. Once she has found such economies, she studies	them in detail and tries to identify the industries, which are expected to witness higher growth than other
industries. Upon identifying high growth industries in selected economies, she tries to find out the

-- 104 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
104 |	104 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
companies in these high growth industries, which are expected to benefit the most from such expected
growth.
A bottom-up approach to the 	fundamental analysis involves identifying companies, which are expected 	to
grow their business without restricting the stock-picking search to any particular industry or economy
(country). All the stocks listed on all the stock exchanges in the world, irrespective of country or industry
of operation, are open for selection to the investor. The investor tries to focus solely on companies with
superior business strengths without worrying a lot about the industry in which it 	operates. This approach is
very well captured by Peter 	Lynch when he says:
Moderately 	fast 	growers 	(20 	to 	25 	percent) 	in 	non-growth 	industries 	are 	ideal
investments.
I follow the bottom-up fundamental investment approach. Therefore, I give more weight to the business
qualities of a company than the industry in which it operates. I try to find a company, which has shown
good growth of sales & profits in past years. I consider such a company a good investment candidate
irrespective of its industry. I try 	to focus on the 	performance of the company in comparison 	to its industry
peers and try to find out if it has 	any business advantage over its peers. Warren Buffett 	calls this business
advantage “Moat”.
Finding whether a company has Moat or distinct business advantage is the main aim of a fundamental
investor. There are varying methods, which different investors use to identify Moat 	of a company:
Many investors visit company stores, manufacturing plants, meet its customers, suppliers, vendors etc. If
time permits, an investor should do these activities, as these 	will give her information that the stock markets
are yet to come across. However, many individual investors including me, have limited time left after the
daytime job and therefore, cannot go to the market and meet different stakeholders of the company.
Therefore, I use secondary sources to identify parameters, which might act as a proxy to the existence of
Moat.
There are many parameters, which can indicate whether a company has any distinct business advantage
(Moat) or not. Consistent history of year on year (YoY) sales growth serves as a very good substitute for
primary market 	research 	for 	finding out 	Moat. 	It has 	served me 	well 	to identify 	good companies, 	which
have grown their market share 	consistently over the years.

-- 105 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
105 |	105 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
If a company has minimal or 	no growth in its sales for past 10 years, then it is 	certain that it does not have
any Moat. Whereas a YoY sales growth of 20% or more indicates that, the company is doing something
that is rewarding it with higher sales.
Let us see two 	companies, which reflect a stark contrast in the 	compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of
sales over 10 years period of 2005-2014: Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) and Vinati Organics Ltd.
(Vinati). The table contains sales figures in 	₹Crores/10 Million:
2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014 	CAGR 2005-14	CAGR 2005-14
SCI	SCI 	3,396 	3,531 	3,703 	3,727 	4,167 	3,463 	3,543 	3,868 	4,198 	4,232 	2%	2%
Vinati	Vinati 	49 	58 	84 	150 	194 	237 	322 	447 	553 	696 	34%	34%
We can see the significant different in the business growth of SCI and Vinati over 10 year period of 	2005-
2014.
Given a choice, an investor should always avoid companies which show minimal/no growth over extended
periods in past 	e.g. SCI which has grown at a meagre rate of 	2%. No wonder that SCI has eroded wealth of
investors over last 10 years as its market capitalization has decreased from 	₹4,000cr (40 billion) in 2005 to
₹3,000 cr. (30 billion) currently. On the contrary, during the same period, Vinati increased its sales at a
growth rate of 34% and created huge wealth for its shareholders. Its market capitalization increased from
₹18 cr. (0.18 billion) in 2005 to 	₹2,200 cr. (22.00 billion) currently.
Alternatively, we can compare the value of 	₹1,000 invested in SCI & Vinati 	in 2005 with its current value.
In SCI the srcinal investment would have reduced to 	₹746 wherein Vinati it would have increased to
₹120,000.

-- 106 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
106 |	106 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
However, the criteria of high sales growth should not be taken at 	face value. Sales growth must be analysed
in detail to conclude whether the company has 	genuine business advantage leading to growth or it is fudging
its accounts to show high growth.
Whenever an investor finds a company that has been growing its sales at a good rate (e.g. more than 20%
YoY) for past 10 years, she should analyse it further to find out whether it is due to due to the distinct
business advantage (Moat) 	of the company:
If a company has sales growth of 20% 	YoY for past 10 years whereas its peers are growing only at 10% or
less, it might have a Moat. However, if 	all the peers are also growing at same pace, 	then the company might
not have any distinct advantage.
Let us compare sales growth of Vinati, which is a speciality chemical company, with other companies of
the same industry during 2005-2014. The table below contains sales figures of each 	company over 10 years
period from 2005-2014. Figures are in 	₹Crore/10 million.
2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014 	CAGR	CAGR
2005-14	2005-14
Vinati	Vinati 	49 	58 	84 	150 	194 	237 	322 	447 	553 	696 	34%	34%
Clariant	Clariant
Chemicals	Chemicals
378 	859 	691 	869 	931 	935 	987 	968 	1096 	1248 	14%	14%
Anil Ltd	Anil Ltd 	172 	172 	202 	225 	276 	374 	504 	602 	707 	825 	19%	19%
We can see that sales of Vinati have grown at a rate of 34%, which is more than the growth of Clariant
(14%) and Anil Ltd. (19%). It leads us to conclude that Vinati has some advantage (Moat) over and above
its peer that is helping it to grow at a faster pace.
Sales growth can come from two sources: increased price of product per unit and increase 	volume of sales
(number of units sold). If a company were able to increase the price of its product consistently without a
decline in demand for its product, it would seem great at first instance. However, 	if sales growth over years
is driven solely by an increase in product prices and not by an increase in sales volume, then it is an
unsustainable growth because, over time, other substitutes of the product will appear in 	the market and the
company would face irrelevance.
Therefore, it is important that the company, apart from increasing prices, should also increase its market
reach by selling its product to more and more customers. The 	data of units of product sold by the company
over years is available in the annual report of every company.

-- 107 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
107 |	107 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
2005	2005 	2014	2014 	CAGR 2005-14	CAGR 2005-14
Production 	capacity 	(tonnes 	per 	annum) 	7,000 	63,500 	28%
Quantity 	sold 	(tonnes) 	(A) 	6,167 	54,737 	27%
Sales 	price 	per 	tonne 	(INR) 	(B) 	79,325 	127,177 	5%
Total sales (₹Cr./10 Million) (A*B) 	49 	696 	34%
Thus, we can see 	that Vinati has achieved its growth in sales from 	₹49 cr. (0.49 billion) in 2005 to 	₹696 cr.
(6.96 billion) in 2014 by increasing its sold quantity from 6,167 tonnes to 	54,737 tonnes and by increasing	the price per tonne of 	its products from 	₹79,325 to 	₹127,177 during the same period.
This pattern is very healthy as the increase in product prices has 	been at an annual growth rate 	(CAGR) of
5%, which is in line with the inflation rate during 2005-14 and, thereby, easily acceptable to consumers.
Most of the sales growth by Vinati has been by finding more & more consumers for its products. These
consumers had choices of buying products from 	Vinati’s 	competitors and buying substitute products.
However, they decided in favour of Vinati. This is a strong sign of distinctive business advantage (Moat)
enjoyed by Vinati.
A company, which has a 	distinct business advantage (Moat) will generate increased profits 	with an increase
in sales. Many companies increase their sales by spending a lot on unnecessary capacity additions; heavy
sales, marketing & advertisement push which leads to short term 	increase in sales. However, high expenses
in terms of interest on debt taken 	to fund unnecessary capacity and marketing expenditures ensure that the
growth in sales does not benefit shareholders in terms 	of increased profits.
Therefore, it is paramount to check 	whether increased sales have led to equivalent growth in profits. Sales
growth without an increase in profits means that there 	is no business advantage.
Let us see how Vinati fairs on this parameter. Figures in the table are in 	₹crore/10 million.
2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014 	CAGR	CAGR
2005-14	2005-14
Sales 	(A) 	49 	58 	84 	150 	194 	237 	322 	447 	553 	696 	34%	34%
Net 	profit
after tax (B)
3 	2 	4 	15 	25 	40 	52 	55 	69 	86 	44%	44%
Net 	profit
margin (B/A)
7% 	3% 	4% 	10% 	13% 	17% 	16% 	12% 	12% 	12%
We can see that Vinati has not only maintained its profitability over the years but also increased its profit
margin from 7% in 2005 to 	12% in 2014. This increased profitability has led to 	Vinati’s 	profits to grow at
higher annual rate (CAGR) of 44% against sales CAGR of 34%. These are signs of a definite business
advantage (Moat).

-- 108 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
108 |	108 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
To compare we must see example of a company, which has increased its sales over the years but was not
able to maintain its profitability. Tata Steel is a good example of one such company. Figure in the table are
in 	₹crore/10 million.
2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014 	CAGR	CAGR
2005-	2005-
1414
Sales (A) 	15,999 	20,244 	25,118 	131,50
0
147,36
5
102,30
6
118,75
3
132,90
0
134,71
2
148,61
4 	28%	28%
Net profit
after 	tax
(B)
3,603 	3,735 	4,177 	12,350 	4,951 	(2,009) 	8,983 	5,390 	(7,058) 	3,595 	0%	0%
Net profit
margin
(B/A)
23% 	18% 	17% 	9% 	3% 	-2% 	8% 	4% 	-5% 	2%
We can see that Tata Steel grew its sales a very good rate of 	28% over 10 years from 2005 to 2014. However,
most of this growth came 	from the acquisition of Corus in 2007-08, which was 	funded by taking huge debt.
The company had to pay huge interest on the debt it had taken. Its product is steel, which is a commodity
product, where 	the buyer can easily 	use steel 	of any 	other company 	to replace 	steel from 	Tata Steel, thereby
offering no distinct business advantage.
The result was that 	the company could not convert its 	growth in sales into higher profits. 	Despite about 10
times increase in sales from 2005 to 2014, its profits were stagnant at 2005 levels (No profit growth in 10
years). It even reported losses 	in 2010 and 2013.
Let us compare how much ₹
1,000 invested in Vinati and Tata Steel in 2005, would have been today.
We can see that 	₹1,000 invested in Vinati in 2005 would have become 	₹120,000 currently, whereas the
same money if invested in Tata 	Steel, would have become only 	₹2,372 currently.

-- 109 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
109 |	109 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Therefore, an investor should avoid companies, which are not able to convert its increasing sales into
profits. 	Such 	companies 	do 	not 	have 	a 	sustainable 	business 	advantage 	and 	are 	not 	good 	investment
opportunities.
We must check whether the growing profits are being received by the company as cash. We learnt
in 	“Financial Analysis of a Company” 	that:
“A company that sells any product today might not receive its payment immediately.
However, it is legitimately eligible to receive it. Therefore, accounting standards allow
it to report this sale and its profit in the P&L. However, the money received from the
buyer 	will 	be 	reflected in 	cash 	flow 	from 	operations (CFO) 	only 	when 	the 	money is
actually received from the buyer. Therefore, if we compare profit after tax (PAT) and
CFO for any one year, they would differ from each other. However, over a long time,
cumulative PAT and CFO should be 	similar.
If cumulative PAT is similar to CFO, it means that the company is able to collect its
profits in 	actual cash 	from its 	buyers. If 	CFO is 	abysmally lower 	than PAT, 	it would
mean that either the company though legitimately eligible to receive money from the
buyer, 	is 	not able 	to 	collect it 	or 	the 	profits are 	fictitious. In 	either 	case, 	the investor
should avoid such a company.”
Let us see whether Vinati is able to convert its profits into cash. Figures in the 	table are in 	₹crore/10 million.
2005	2005 	2006	2006 	2007	2007 	2008	2008 	2009	2009 	2010	2010 	2011	2011 	2012	2012 	2013	2013 	2014	2014 	Total	Total
PAT 	3 	2 	4 	15 	25 	40 	52 	55 	69 	86 	351	351
CFO 	4 	2 	2 	12 	27 	29 	31 	20 	92 	134 	353	353
Thus, we can see that profits generated by Vinati over the years have been collected in cash. It ensures that
profits 	are 	not 	inflated 	or 	fictitious. 	This 	confirms 	that 	the 	business 	advantage 	(Moat) 	enjoyed 	by 	the
company is for real.
Any company can do two things with the profits it generates from its 	operations. Either it can distribute all
the profits to its shareholders or it can 	retain some/all of it with itself to invest for 	the growth of operations.
Any company, which has a sustained business advantage (Moat) will generate greater value for its
shareholders from the profits it retains with itself after paying dividends. Warren Buffett says that any
company must generate at least $1 in market value for every $1 it retains with itself.
Let us check how Vinati and Tata Steel compare on this parameter. Figures in the table are in 	₹crore/10
million.
Vinati Organics	Vinati Organics 	Tata Steel	Tata Steel

-- 110 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
110 |	110 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Total retained profits of last 10 	years (A) 	305 	28,228
Total increase in market capitalization in 10 years (B) 	2,174 	22,780
Value created per 	₹of retained profits (B/A) 	7.13	7.13 	0.81	0.81
Thus, we can see that Vinati Organics created the value of 	₹7.13 for every 	₹1 of profits retained for
investment by it, whereas Tata Steel created only 	₹0.81 of value for every 	₹1 	of profit retained by it. In
effect, Tata Steel destroyed the value of shareholders’ money that it decided to invest in its own business,
which does not have any distinctive business advantage (Moat). On the contrary, we can see that Vinati
Organics has generated huge value for its shareholders because of the distinctive business advantage it	enjoys.
Thus, we can see that 	an individual investor, who do not have enough time and resources to 	conduct primary
market research like visiting company stores, 	manufacturing plants, meet its customers, suppliers, vendors,
interacting with industry stakeholders, experts etc., can also identify companies with distinct business
advantage (Moat) and create wealth for herself in the long term.
In the current chapter, we learnt about business & industry analysis (BIA) of a company before investing
in its stock. We learned 	that in the bottom-up fundamental analysis, an investor should not worry about 	the
industry in which a company operates. 	Instead, she should focus on identifying companies with sustainable
distinct business advantage (Moat).
We learned that the individual investor, who does not have enough time & resources to conduct primary
research and interact with 	different shareholders, should analyse sales growth shown by a company in 	past,
in detail to identify whether the company has signs of 	Moat.
We learned that 	for identifying companies with sustainable business advantage (Moat), an 	investor should
focus only on companies, which have 	shown good growth rates in their sales (>15-20%) 	in past. She should
conduct in-depth analysis of factors of sales growth and other tests to find out whether the sales growth is
due to Moat or 	management aggression for expansion or accounting jugglery.
Here is a summary of the parameters, which should be tested on a company showing high sales growth in
past, to find out whether it has a Moat:
1. 	Comparison with industry peers	Comparison with industry peers: The Company must show sales growth higher than peers. If its
sales growth is similar to peers, then there is no Moat.
2. 	Increase in production capacity and sales volume	Increase in production capacity and sales volume: The Company must have shown increased
market penetration by selling higher volumes of its product/service. Sales growth that comes only	by 	increasing 	the 	price 	of 	the 	product 	is 	not 	sustainable 	as 	over 	time, 	substitute 	products 	start
appearing in the market.

-- 111 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
111 |	111 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
3. 	Conversion of sales growth into profits	Conversion of sales growth into profits: A Moat would result in 	increasing profits with increasing
sales. Otherwise, sales growth is only a result of unnecessary expansion or aggressive marketing
push, which would erode value in long term.
4. 	Conversion of profits into cash	Conversion of profits into cash: Increasing profits due to Moat must be collected as cash.
Otherwise, either the profits are fictitious or the company is selling to any John Doe for 	higher sales
without having the ability to collect money from them.
5. 	Creation of value for shareholders from the profits retained by the company	Creation of value for shareholders from the profits retained by the company: The Company
with Moat will create significantly higher market value for its shareholders for every 	₹ 	of profits
retained by it. If a company were destroying the value of 	shareholders money, it would never have
a Moat, however fast it may show its sales to be growing.
Thus, if an investor can find a company, which has shown high sales growth (>15-20%) over last 10 year
and which can pass the test of 5 parameters discussed above, then she can be certain that she has found a
company which has a sustainable business advantage. Such companies have the potential to create
significant wealth for their shareholders over long periods. She should invest in such companies and stay
with them for decades.
Investors around the world use many more parameters to judge the presence of Moat. Return on Equity
(ROE) and Return on Capital Employed (ROCE) are the prominent parameters being used by many
investors for this purpose. However, 	I am not a great proponent of ROE and ROCE 	and I believe that if an
investor can test the company on above 5 parameters, then she can 	be reasonably certain that the companies
invested by her have strong indications of distinct business advantage (Moat).

-- 112 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
112 |	112 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Buying a good stock at a cheap price is one of the key pillars for making wealth in the stock markets. If an
investor pays too much for the stock, then she may not make any money despite the sustained good
performance of the company whereas if she gets a stock a deep bargain 	then even a moderate performance
by the company might provide her good returns.
Every investor wishes to buy the stocks of companies at cheaper prices. However, each investor uses
different criteria to assess whether the stock of a company is selling at cheap or 	expensive levels. Some use
price to earnings ratio 	(P/E ratio), others use 	price to book value ratio 	(P/B ratio), dividend yield, sales to
market capitalization for their assessment.
One of the 	other criteria that commonly surfaces during a 	discussion on valuations, is price to earnings ratio
(P/E ratio) of the industry. Different investors use Industry P/E ratio differently in their stock selection
process.
Looking at the popularity of Industry P/E ratio as a stock selection parameter, I have been repeatedly asked
by many 	readers and investors about 	the importance 	one should 	assign to 	Industry 	P/E ratio while 	selecting
stocks for investing.
The current chapter is an attempt to elaborate my perspective on the relevance of Industry P/E ratio in the
stock analysis. The chapter would highlight my views on importance 	and usage of Industry P/E 	ratio in the
selection of stocks for investing.
Industry P/E ratio provides an idea to investors about the average P/E ratio of all the companies in that
industry, which are listed on the 	stock exchanges. There can be 	varied methods in which Industry P/E can
be calculated. 	Some sources 	calculate it 	as a 	simple average 	of P/E 	ratio 	of the 	constituent companies of
the industry whereas some other 	sources calculate it as market-capitalization weighted average of 	P/E ratios
of constituent companies. Or simply, it can be the ratio of total market capitalization of all the companies
in the industry to the net 	profits of all these companies.
Different investors have different beliefs behind using Industry P/E ratio in their 	stock selection process:
 	Some investors believe that companies operating in a 	particular industry would always have a P/E
ratio higher than other industries. E.g. it is normally perceived that companies operating in the
service industry would have a higher P/E ratio than companies operating in the manufacturing
industry. Therefore, investors believe that it is ok 	to buy companies 	belonging to certain industries
at a higher P/E and assume 	that such stocks even at a higher P/E 	ratio would provide the same level
of margin of safety than 	another stock trading at a lower P/E 	ratio in a different industry.
o 	The underlying logic given is that manufacturing is more capital intensive than services
and therefore the consistent requirement of capital infusion in the business would be a
constant drag on company’s resources leading to lower P/E ratio.
o 	Within manufacturing, it is assumed that 	certain companies like FMCG group would have
a higher P/E ratio than traditional/commodity companies like cement.

-- 113 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
113 |	113 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
 	Some investors believe that a stock trading at a P/E ratio lower than its Industry P/E is cheaply
priced. The inherent assumption is that the selected 	stock deserves to be priced at the 	P/E ratio of
the industry.
 	Investors’ belief also has the assumption that the P/E ratio of all the stocks in the industry should
tend to drift towards Industry P/E ratio. This is called Mean Reversion theory, which indicates that
the P/E ratio of the stocks with P/E ratio lower than 	Industry P/E ratio, would rise and the P/E ratio
of stock with P/E ratio higher than 	Industry P/E ratio, would fall to the Industry P/E 	ratio.
Moreover, the Industry P/E ratio data is readily available at various publically available sources of data like
Moneycontrol. If an investor believes in using Industry P/E ratio 	as a method of 	assessing the over/under-
valuation level of any stock, then 	it provides her an easy checklist 	tool to decide about the valuation of 	the
stock.
However, I do not believe in using industry P/E ratio as selection criteria for stocks and have been 	advising
readers & investors about the same. There are many reasons for it:
Almost always, every industry has stocks spread across a wide range of P/E ratios. This is true for any
industry be it manufacturing or services.
The following data about Cement, Cigarettes 	and Banking industry taken from Moneycontrol for 	March 4,
2016, clearly illustrates wide variation in 	these industries.
(The data provided on Moneycontrol website for comparative analysis consists of P/E ratios based on	
standalone financials and the same has been 	used for the purpose of this 	chapter.)
Industry Cigarettes:	Industry Cigarettes:
We can see that the range of P/E ratios of the constituent companies, is very wide.

-- 114 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
114 |	114 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
In Cigarettes industry, Raghunath International Limited is trading at a P/E ratio of 3.80 whereas Godfrey
Philips India Limited is trading at a 	P/E ratio of 34.22, whereas the 	industry P/E ratio is 26.24.
Industry Cement-Major:	Industry Cement-Major:
In Cement-Major industry, Saurashtra Cements Limited is available at a P/E ratio of 5.74 while Prism
Cement Limited is available at 	P/E ratio of 396, whereas the 	industry P/E ratio is 38.76.

-- 115 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
115 |	115 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Industry Banks-Private Sector:	Industry Banks-Private Sector:
In Banking-Private Sector, Karnataka Bank Limited is available at a P/E ratio of 4.13 whereas Kotak
Mahindra Bank Limited is available at a P/E ratio of 63.68, whereas the industry P/E ratio is 18.36.
This range of P/E ratio of individual stocks within an industry has always been very wide in the past and is
expected to remain so in future. There would be stocks, which are 	constantly poor performing, which would
keep selling at lower P/E ratios and 	there would be stocks which are good performing and therefore 	would
keep selling at higher P/E ratios.
There would be unrecognized stocks selling at low P/E initially, which would show sustained good
performance and become recognized later on and would sell at high P/E.
Similarly, there would be stock which performed well 	in the past and therefore sold 	at higher P/E ratio, but
over time have lost business advantage and started performing poorly. Such stocks would sell at low P/E
ratio going ahead.
There would also be times when a stock whose business is declining, would see its earnings fall and after
initial decline in P/E ratio caused by commensurate decline in price along with earnings, would suddenly

-- 116 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
116 |	116 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
seem trading at high P/E ratio when the fall in earnings (denominator) is much more than the fall in stock
price (numerator). 	A time 	would come when 	the earnings would 	be NIL or 	negative and 	P/E ratio would
tend to be infinity!
Therefore, an investor would notice that within an 	industry, there is no established norm that 	all the players
would trade at a specific P/E ratio, which many times is assumed to be characteristic of that particular
industry. P/E ratio is dependent on the characteristics of the company. If a company performs good, then
the market would reward it with higher P/E ratio and if the company is not 	performing good, then the market
would penalize it by lowering its P/E ratio.
An investor would notice that the P/E ratios of good performing manufacturing companies do sell at a
higher P/E ratio than poorly performing services companies, whereas the common perception is that the
companies in the asset light services industry should trade at a higher P/E ratio than asset heavy
manufacturing/commodity 	industries.
An investor would observe that in the P/E data for various industries shared above, established players in
cement industry like UltraTech Cement Limited, Ambuja Cements Limited, J K Cement Limited etc.
despite being in capital-intensive manufacturing sector trade at a higher P/E ratio (37-38) than their
counterparts in the asset light banking industry like HDFC Bank Limited, Yes Bank Limited (P/E ratio of
22 & 13.36 	respectively).
Moreover, if we 	compare the P/E ratio of these 	good performing cement companies with poorly performing
banks 	like 	J&K 	Bank, 	Karnataka 	Bank 	(P/E 	ratio 	of 	5.48 	and 	4.13 	respectively), 	then 	the 	difference
becomes further distinct.
Therefore, the investor would notice that the P/E ratio is dependent upon the business performance of the
company and not on the industry to which it belongs. If 	the company selected by an investor performs well,
then the market would reward it with a higher P/E multiple, irrespective of the industry to which this
company belongs.
Many times, investors believe that if a stock is selling at lower than Industry P/E ratio, then it is cheaply
priced and if it is selling 	at a higher P/E ratio than Industry 	P/E, then the stock is expensive.
The underlying assumption by the investor is that the P/E ratio of 	the stocks selling at lower than Industry
P/E ratio would rise to the Industry P/E ratio. Similarly, the P/E ratio of stock with selling at higher than
Industry P/E ratio would fall to the 	Industry P/E ratio.

-- 117 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
117 |	117 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
This assumption is Mean Reversion theory. Investopedia defines mean reversion as:
“The mean reversion is the theory suggesting that prices and returns eventually move
back towards the mean or average. This 	mean or average can be the 	historical average
of the price or return or another relevant average such as the growth in the economy or
the average return of an industry.”
However, there is enough evidence in the real life that basing investment decisions on mean reversion
theory might not be a 	successful investment strategy.
The most widely known & the biggest victim of investment philosophy based on mean reversion is the
hedge fund Long Term Capital Management (LTCM). LTCM 	was managed by the most brilliant brains of
current times including the noble laureates Myron S. Scholes and Robert C. Merton of the Black-Scholes-
Merton model for options pricing.
After studying the yield data of different investment instruments for past many years and analysing it
statistically, LTCM based its investment strategy on 	the premise that 	yields of different instruments would
always converge towards their historical mean/average. Therefore, LTCM bought the yield (took a long
position on 	the yield), whenever it fell below historical average and sold 	it short 	whenever it 	rose above the
historical average.
LTCM could make money through this strategy for about 4-5 years. However, during one such period in
1998, the yields did not revert to the mean. On the contrary, they kept on moving further away from the
mean. No wonder, accentuated by its leverage, LTCM became bankrupt within a few days.
Therefore, an investor would notice that if she buys a stock trading at a P/E ratio, which is lower than its
Industry P/E ratio, thinking that the P/E ratio of her stock would rise over time to the level of its Industry
P/E, then she might be up 	for disappointment as such mean reversion may not happen at all. There 	might a
possibility 	that such 	a mean 	reversion might happen 	eventually, 	but it 	may take so 	much time 	that the 	return
in such a 	delayed scenario might not be attractive.
As has been said by 	the famous economist, John Maynard Keynes:
"Markets can remain irrational longer than you can 	remain solvent."
Industry P/E ratio is a derived number, which is calculated from the constituent companies either by a
simple average or a market capitalization weighted average of their individual P/E ratios. Movement of P/E
ratios of individual ratios would lead to increase or decrease 	in the Industry P/E ratio.
As mentioned in the point (1) 	above, the P/E ratios of 	individual companies within any industry vary a lot
and therefore, Industry P/E does not influence the 	P/E level of its constituent companies.

-- 118 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
118 |	118 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Furthermore, I believe that if an investor is able to buy stocks of a potentially good company at cheaper
valuations (low P/E ratio) in an industry, which currently has a low P/E ratio, then in future, when the
selected company performs well and the market assigns its stock a higher P/E ratio, then this company
would increase the P/E ratio of 	the entire industry.
Therefore, I believe that it’s the Industry P/E that is influenced by its constituent companies and an 	investor
should choose good performing stocks at cheaper 	valuations irrespective of its Industry P/E ratio levels. A
good performing company's stock will make the industry P/E higher, when market assigns it 	high P/E (re-
rates it), rather than the 	market penalizing its good performance by putting it at lower P/E 	despite its good
performance.
Many times, a 	company might be operating in a 	niche industry, which might not have many players listed
on stock exchanges. In such a case, 	the financial portals like Moneycontrol might put it under any industry
segment that might not be a 	true representative for its line of 	business.
As the financial portals have fixed number of industries in their data sets, they assign the company to any
industry, which the staff believes, is the 	nearest to the company’s line of 	business and the financial portals
provide the Industry P/E data for such a stock based on non-comparable peers. In such cases, the investors
who rely on Industry P/E for their analysis might make erroneous decisions based on the irrelevant Industry
P/E data.
E.g. Mayur Uniquoters Limited, which manufactures artificial leather, does not have a lot of listed peers
from the same 	line of business. Therefore financial portals find it 	difficult to classify it any of 	their existing
set of industries. We may see below that Moneycontrol has assigned Mayur Uniquoters Limited to
“Plastics” industry, whereas screener has assigned it to “Textile” industry:
Peers on Moneycontrol:	Peers on Moneycontrol:

-- 119 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
119 |	119 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Peers on Screener:	Peers on Screener:
As a result, an investor would observe that the Industry P/E ratio of 31.53 (March 4, 2016) provided by	Moneycontrol for Mayur Uniquoters Limited, is not a relevant data point. An investor who takes an
investment decision based on such erroneous Industry P/E data, might, unknowingly, make an incorrect
decision.
Based on the above points, I believe that the Industry P/E ratio for a company is not a significant parameter
for stock selection. I ignore the industry P/E data in my stock selection process, as I know that 	industry P/E
depends on its stocks and if the selected stock does well, then it will pull the industry P/E ratio higher
because 	of 	its 	sustained good 	performance 	rather 	than 	getting 	impacted 	by 	the 	poor 	performance 	of 	its
peers.
It might be erroneous to believe that stocks operating in a certain industry deserve to be priced at a higher
P/E when compared to stocks in other industries. We saw in the above discussion that good performing
stocks get rewarded by the market by 	assignment of a high P/E 	ratio irrespective of their industry.
Therefore, I believe that an 	investor should focus on finding companies which are showing good growth in
their sales with sustained profitability, are conservatively financed, are producing free cash flow from their
operations and are cheaply priced providing a good margin of 	safety, irrespective of their industries.

-- 120 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
120 |	120 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Similarly, the investor should not be willing to buy stocks of any particular industry on a high P/E ratio
merely because of the fact that the company belongs to that industry. The investor might face non-pleasant
surprises if the selected company does not perform well and lags its peers in terms of P/E ratio whereas
other good performing companies keep rewarding their shareholders both by way of higher earnings and
resultant high P/E ratios.
Therefore, I believe that an investor should not focus on Industry P/E and in turn should always focus on
finding fundamentally good companies selling a cheap price, irrespective of industry.

-- 121 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
121 |	121 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Most of the investors, including me, enter the stock markets to fulfil a dream. This is a dream of financial
independence. This dream is reinforced by the history of astronomical returns that some of the businesses
have generated for their shareholders in the past; Infosys and Wipro being a few of them. I have always
aspired to be a shareholder of any such company, which can turn my investment of a few thousands of
rupees into millions.
This quest of finding the elixir of stock investing has led me into different directions in the past; first	
technical investing and then later 	fundamental investing.
My quest for a 	guiding light, which could act as a beacon for the while I 	charter the hitherto unknown seas
(to me) of stock investing, ended when I first read Intelligent Investor by Benjamin Graham in 2008 and
later on letters of Warren 	Buffett to shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway in 2011.
One of the key learning I could get from Graham and Buffett was that I should look at stocks not a trading
paper to be 	sold at the 	flip of a 	coin but as 	a part of 	a functioning business, which is 	to be held 	over long
periods of time.
However, I have always felt a disconnect with Warren Buffett’s above statement in the owner’s manual of
Berkshire Hathaway.
Warren Buffett can feel as part owner of a business of his investee companies because he usually buys
significant stakes in those companies and has the wherewithal to influence the management decision.

-- 122 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
122 |	122 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Whether he actually influences all or a few management decisions, can be a question of debate, but there
has never been a doubt that his opinion is difficult to be ignored by the management of his investee
companies.
However, when I see myself, or any other retail individual shareholder, as an investor in listed companies,
I find that we are always nameless minority shareholders in these companies. Retail shareholders do not
have any influence on the 	business decisions being taken by board &/or management. Most of the 	decisions
get approved by consent of >50% 	shareholders and some critical ones get approved by 	the consent of >75%
of the shareholders.
A retail investor usually has a very 	minuscule shareholding in a company. An investment of 	₹100,000 in a
company with market capitalization of 	₹300,000 cr is 0.000003% of its shareholding.
In such a situation, I had 	always felt that the notion of a 	retail shareholder being a part owner of a 	business
is slightly over-rated. The hard fact of life is that a retail shareholder with a 0.000003% shareholding is
someone whose opinion does not bear a lot of influence on business decisions and the retail shareholder
has no other option but to 	accept whatever business decision is being taken for her by promoters 	or majority
shareholders.
A retail shareholder is not able to control where his investee company would deploy its cash; she is 	not able
to control whether the company would pay a dividend or how much dividend. A retail shareholder is not
able to control who would run the company for her, in case the existing management leaves scope for
improvement. She cannot control whether her investee company should do or not do an acquisition. A
shareholding of 0.000003% is simply not large enough.
Therefore, at the end 	of the day, a retail shareholder feels 	that her fate is 	in 	the hands 	of the
management/promoters/majority shareholders of the 	company. Whether the said management 	would think
of her best interests while deciding about future of the company or its business, is out of her control. At
best what she can do is to vote with her feet: sell out her shares and leave.
In such a tough helpless situation for a retail shareholder, I have always felt that the real risk that a retail
investor is carrying while investing in stock markets, is not that the company she has invested in, would
perform badly. 	The real 	risk she 	faces is 	the management/promoter who 	controls 	the destiny 	of the 	business
and the returns that she would get from her investment, might not think about her when deciding on the
company.
The retail investor might have invested in a very good business. The business might be a cash cow,
generating crores of surplus cash year after year, but if the management/promoter decides not to share it
with the retail shareholder, she will never get even a single rupee out of it.
The retail investor has always found a management/promoter/majority shareholder standing between the
fruits of the business and herself. If the management decides to appropriate these fruits of business to
themselves, there is hardly little a retail investor can do except to sell out 	her shares and leave.
In light of these hard but true rules of the game called stock investing, for a retail shareholder, I have come
to believe that a stock is 	not a part ownership of in 	the business; for a retail shareholder, a stock is:

-- 123 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
123 |	123 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
1. 	a faith in the 	management;
2. 	it is a partnership with the promoter;
3. 	it is a trust in 	the majority shareholder.
If the management/promoter/majority shareholder decides to breach this trust, then there are very limited
options available for a retail shareholder.
Therefore, I approach equity investing while keeping these thoughts/rules of the game in my mind, which
make management assessment as the most 	critical aspect of stock selection.
This is not to undermine the 	importance of other aspects of the 	process of stock selection.
It is to emphasize that even if an investor has satisfied herself about the financial, business and valuation
analysis of any company, if she is not able to get the confidence from her assessment of the management
of the company, then she 	should rethink her investment decision.
However good the business of the company be, however large competitive advantage (moat) it might claim,
however attractive its current valuations be or however strong its 	financial position be, if the management
is not minority shareholder friendly then it is highly likely that she will not make 	money despite sustained
good business performance of the company.
An over-ingenious management/promoter/majority shareholder would always find ways to benefit at the
cost of minority shareholders. Such cases have happened in the past and as we understand that history
repeats itself, would surely happen in future.
Let us see some 	of the good businesses to understand what results they bore to 	minority shareholders:
Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited:	Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited:
Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited is a small cap company with market capitalization of 	₹33 cr. it was
established in Baroda in 1973. The company makes auto and tractor components including transmission
gears and axle shafts. Its products target OEMs and after-markets in India and sell under the brand name of
KAG in India. The company also exports its products and has the United States of America, Germany, Italy,
United Kingdom, Belgium, Egypt, Dubai, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, Australia etc. as its
overseas markets.
Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited was first brought to my notice in April 2015 by one of the readers of
my website “Venkatasubramaniyan Natarajan”, who has shared his analysis of the company and has asked
for my inputs.
Analysis of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited revealed that it 	was a great 	business. The following financial
performance would reflect 	that the 	company 	has been 	showing 	the picture perfect 	image of 	a good 	business:

-- 124 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
124 |	124 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
1. 	Sales had been increasing at a good pace (17%)
2. 	Profits had been increasing at even higher pace
3. 	All the profitability margins were at respectable levels and were 	improving further
4. 	The company was a debt free company and
5. 	Has a cash chest, which was swelling year on year because its business was a cash cow.
Such a business is always a prize catch to investors and there was no surprise that in July 2013, the 	company
was acquired by HIM Teknoforge Limited for 	₹21.8 cr. when it purchased the 55% shareholding of
erstwhile promoters.
The company went on with its business as usual under the new promoters and finished the next year,
FY2014, by generating the highest ever sales of 	₹29 cr. and profits of 	₹5 cr.
However, the investors were in for a 	surprise when the balance-sheet of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited
at March 31, 2014, was made public and it showed that the cash holding has reduced from 	₹6cr. in FY2013
to 	₹1 cr. in FY2014.

-- 125 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
125 |	125 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The usage of cash remained a key issue to be found out as the 	company has not used it to pay a dividend to
its shareholders.
The analysis of the balance sheet at March 31, 2014 showed that Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited has
utilized its existing cash reserves (decline by about 	₹5 cr.) as well as the profits generated in the year
FY2014 (increase in reserves & surplus of about 	₹4.5 cr) to provide loans & advance to some entity
(increase by about 	₹10 cr.).

-- 126 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
126 |	126 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The balance sheet of 	Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited showed that it had only about 	₹3 cr invested in the
fixed assets used to make products to generate its sales & profits, whereas it has 	given a loan of about 	₹10
cr to some entity.
Such kind of loan, which makes 	loan assets more than fixed assets reflected that 	the management of Gujarat
Automotive Gears Limited is finding more value in lending the money than investing it in its core business.
As this business decision of the Gujarat 	Automotive Gears Limited had important implications, it becomes
imperative for any investor to find out 	who is the entity to whom this loan has 	been given.
The investors could find these details in the 	annual report of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited for FY2014,	
in a section called “Related Party Transactions”:
Details in the related 	party transactions section revealed that Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited has 	given
a loan (inter-corporate deposit) of 	₹9 cr. to HIM 	Teknoforge Limited in FY2014.
This action by Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited meant that it has used its cash reserves and its entire
profits for FY2014 and used it to give a loan to HIM Teknoforge Limited. HIM Teknoforge Limited is no
one but the new 	promoter of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited, who has 	acquired it in July 2013 by buying
55% of the shares in the company.
It effectively meant that the new promoter, HIM Teknoforge Limited, within a few months of acquisition
of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited has used it as a source of funds (to the extent of 	₹9 cr) to serve the
purposes of HIM Teknoforge Limited.
I doubt that minority shareholders could have controlled the loan, which HIM Teknoforge Limited being
the management & largest shareholder, made 	Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited give to itself.
Giving the benefit of doubt to the promoter, HIM Teknoforge 	Limited, that it might be a one of 	an instance
of financial issues with it that it has 	to take financial help from Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited, it made
sense to analyse the fate of this loan over the next year.

-- 127 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
127 |	127 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The related party transactions section of the annual report of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited for FY2015
showed the following picture:
The investors got the surprise that the 	amount of said loan from 	Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited to HIM
Teknoforge Limited, instead of reducing (i.e. 	getting repaid) had increased from 	₹9 cr at March 31, 2014,
to 	₹17 cr. at March 31, 2015. It meant that an additional amount of 	₹8 cr was transferred as an inter-
corporate deposit from Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited to HIM Teknoforge Limited during FY2015.
This is a significant development on two accounts:
1. 	It indicates that the new promoter, HIM Teknoforge Limited, is using the acquired company,
Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited, as a continuous source of funds for 	its own purposes.
2. 	Investors would notice that Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited used to make 	a profit of 	about 	₹4.5-
5 cr. every year, however, the 	loan amount given is more than the profits for a year. Investors would
remember that the cash reserves of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited had already been depleted	to give the loan of 	₹9 cr. to HIM Teknoforge Limited last year (FY2014). So the question arises,
where did the balance money come from, which was used to give a loan (inter-corporate deposit)
to HIM Teknoforge Limited?
An analysis of balance sheet of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited for FY2015 shows the following
shocking picture:

-- 128 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
128 |	128 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited in addition to using its profits for FY2015 (increase in reserves &
surplus of about 	₹4.5 cr), has taken a debt of 	₹4.7 cr. and used it to give the additional inter-corporate
deposit of 	₹ 	8 cr. to its new promoter HIM Teknoforge Limited. Being the majority shareholder HIM
Teknoforge Limited is effectively making Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited take 	debt and then use 	these
debt proceeds to give deposits to itself.
An investor would notice from the financial performance of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited until
FY2013 that it used to have a strong business, which was a cash cow. Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited
was accumulating cash chest and the need 	to take debt did not 	arise.
Now, 	the 	management 	is 	making 	Gujarat 	Automotive 	Gears 	Limited, 	which 	still 	has 	the 	same 	good
business, take debt to give loans to itself (to HIM Teknoforge Limited) and the cost of this debt (the long-
term debt of 	₹4.7 cr. from SIDBI @12% 	p.a. GAGL FY2015 annual report, pg. 30) 	would have to be borne
by Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited.
This effectively means that shareholders of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited are bearing the cost of debt
which Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited is raising to give as inter-corporate deposit to the promoter HIM
Teknoforge Limited.
The balance sheet of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited for at March 31, 2015, also shows that the company
now has only 	₹2.6 cr. in fixed assets (plants & machinery) and whopping 	₹19.35 cr. given as loans &
advances. This accompanied with the fact that Gujarat 	Automotive Gears Limited is now taking debt from

-- 129 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
129 |	129 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
other financial institutions to give deposits to others, shows that 	the character of 	Gujarat Automotive Gears
Limited is now changing from a 	manufacturing organization to a lending organization.
I doubt a retail 	individual shareholder who has 	an ownership of a fraction of 	a percentage point in Gujarat
Automotive Gears Limited, could have controlled any of these business decisions.
Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited was becoming an interesting case generating curiosity as an investor
analyses its development year on year. Therefore, I could not stop myself analysing the fate of the story to
the latest available data available in the 	public domain.
The latest data of the balance sheet of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited is available for September 30,	2015:
Looking at the actions of the new promoters, HIM Teknoforge Limited, it did not come as a surprise that
during first 6 months of FY2016:

-- 130 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
130 |	130 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
1. 	Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited has given an additional amount of 	₹6.5 cr. as long-term loans
& advances to others. The details of names of these parties would be known in the annual report
for FY2016 would be available later.
2. 	Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited has used its profits for H1-Y2016 (increase in reserves &
surplus of about 	₹2 cr) and has taken additional debt (increase in long-term debt of 	₹3.2 cr.) and
used it to give the additional inter-corporate deposit of 	₹ 	6 cr.
Looking at the trend of actions of the new promoter HIM Teknoforge Limited for past 2 years, it would not
come as a 	surprise that the additional deposit of 	₹6 cr. is also 	made to HIM Teknoforge Limited. However,
it remains to be confirmed when 	the annual report of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited for FY2016 along
with details of related party transactions is available in public 	domain.
The developments at Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited over last two years have presented some important
observations:
 	HIM Teknoforge Limited has paid 	₹21.8 cr. to acquire control of Gujarat Automotive Gears
Limited in July 2013 and until March 31, 2015, it has received cash of 	₹17 cr. as deposit from
Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited. The amount of cash 	received by HIM Teknoforge Limited from
Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited could already have crossed its acquisition cost of 	₹21.8 cr. if
the additional loans & advances of 	₹6 cr. given by Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited in H1-
FY2016 also turn out to be given to 	HIM Teknoforge Limited.
 	From the perspective of shareholders of HIM Teknoforge Limited, it has turned out to be an
excellent acquisition:
 	They have received almost entire consideration paid, back in terms of inter-corporate
deposits and still enjoy control on the 	great cash generating business of Gujarat 	Automotive
Gears Limited almost free of cost now. Effectively the shareholders of HIM Teknoforge
Limited have made Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited pay for its 	own acquisition.
 	However, if seen from the perspective of shareholders of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited, the
picture does not look 	so shining:
 	The new promoter, HIM Teknoforge Limited, has used Gujarat Automotive Gears
Limited’s Past Profits (decline in cash reserves:₹5 	Cr), 	Current 	Profits 	(Earnings 	of 	2.5
years: 	₹12 Cr) as well as 	Future Profits (Debt to be repaid by GAGL: 	₹8 Cr) and used this
entire amount to given loans to HIMself (HIM Teknoforge Limited)
 	The benefits of Past, Present and Future has been taken away from the shareholders of
Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited and a retail shareholder with minuscule ownership of
the company could have hardly done anything to stop these transactions being controlled
by management/promoters/majority shareholders.

-- 131 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
131 |	131 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The analysis of developments at Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited since 	the takeover by new promoters,
presents some key lessons 	for retail shareholders:
1. 	Management stands as a 	mediator between the profits of the 	business and the retail shareholder. If
the 	management 	of 	a 	company 	is 	not 	minority 	shareholder 	friendly, 	then 	retail 	minority
shareholders might not get to share the fruits of profits of a company, however good the business
performance of the company may be.
2. 	Equity investment is more than a part-ownership of a business; it is a faith in the integrity of the
management
3. 	Retail investors should work hard and try to 	sense the first sign of 	management playing smart with
them and exit from the company. Else, such managements will keep on finding ways to benefit at
minority shareholders’ cost.
In the case of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited, if a shareholder could have observed the decisions of
new promoters when details of inter-corporate deposit were 	disclosed in the annual report of FY2014, then
she could have avoided the transfer of 	earnings, which have continued to happen later on. The 	retail investor
could 	have 	found 	some 	other 	investment 	opportunities 	where 	the 	promoter/management/majority
shareholders are the ones who might be 	more shareholder friendly and invested in them.
Many times, retail investors believe that such kind of instances, as highlighted in the above chapter, happen
only in small caps, which are not under coverage radar of market analysts, brokerage firms etc. However,
if an investor keeps her observing the market-related developments around her, then she would notice that
such instances of management/promoter/majority shareholder acting in a manner which is not in the
interests of minority retail shareholders are very frequent. Such instances keep 	on happening in companies
across market cap segments, across industries.
Few of the examples may be:
1. 	Vedanta Limited decides to pay 	minority shareholders 	₹355/- a share against 	₹405/- a share it paid
to Cairn Energy UK for acquiring a 	stake in Cairn India Limited. The difference 	of 	₹50/- per share,
which was labelled as “non-compete fee” was described as legally right be not the best from
corporate governance perspective by Mr. Omkar Goswami, an 	Independent Director of Cairn India
Limited
2. 	Cairn India Limited gave a loan of $1.25 billion (₹7,830 cr) to group company THL Zinc Limited
at an interest rate of 	3% + 3 month LIBOR (total current cost of about 3.60%), 	whereas Cairn India
could have deposited this money in an FD by State 	Bank of India for 2 	years and earned about 7.50-
8.00%. The loss of the income is a cost to shareholders of Cairn India Limited.
3. 	The decision of Maruti to enter into 	arrangements with its parent Suzuki in relation to the new 	plant
in Gujarat has been questioned.

-- 132 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
132 |	132 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Therefore, it is imperative that a retail investor understands that she needs to be very vigilant about
management actions while investing afresh or staying invested in any company. Management is the most
critical factor that would decide whether she, as a retail minority shareholder, would get benefited from the
fruits of business growth the company.

-- 133 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
133 |	133 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The current chapter would highlight some of the 	key steps/tools that investors should use to find out a good
management and avoid bad management. An 	investor should read these carefully and inculcate them in 	her
stock analysis process so that she 	may avoid falling into the 	trap of unscrupulous managements that try to
benefit at the cost of minority shareholders.
Let’s study the tools available to common shareholders by which she can decide about the management
quality of a company by using the 	information available in the public domain:
Checking the background of the promoters’ is the first step in the assessment of the management of any
company. A background check might mean different things for different investors. Some may stress on
educational qualifications while others may focus on the family background, however, I advise 	investors to
focus on the past 	management decisions of the promoters.
Educational qualifications do not give the investor any idea about the shareholder friendliness of the
promoters. 	Shareholder 	friendliness 	is reflected in 	the character 	and integrity 	of the promoters/management.
Therefore, the investor should focus on promoters’ past decisions and try to assess whether those decisions
were taken while keeping the interest of minority shareholders’ in mind.
Let’s see an example of a good business and try to assess its promoter’s background and find out 	whether
the background check helps the investor in decision making:
Brooks Laboratories Limited	Brooks Laboratories Limited
Brooks Laboratories Limited, established in 2002, is a small cap company with market cap of about 	₹110
cr. It is active in contract manufacturing space and boasted of big names like Zydus Cadilla, Alembic,
Wockhardt, FDC, Alkem etc. in its clientele.
Brooks Laboratories Limited came into my investment radar in 2013 due to its 	very good financial position:
Brooks Laboratories Limited’s financials presented a picture perfect scenario of 	any good business:

-- 134 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
134 |	134 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
1. 	Sales were growing at 23%
2. 	Profits were growing at an even higher rate of 36%
3. 	Brooks Laboratories Limited was using its profits to repay debt and was essentially debt free at the
end of FY2013 and
4. 	As the company was acting like a 	cash machine, it was able 	to generate surplus cash after meeting
debt repayments and was accumulating cash reserves year on 	year.
Finding a company with such performance is a 	dream for any investor and I was very 	happy to have chanced
upon Brooks Laboratories Limited.
However, as mentioned above, I suggest that every investor should do the background check of promoters’
before making an investment decision. The steps to do a background check is very simple:
“Just Google It”	“Just Google It”
It is essential to search for the name of the company with certain keywords like “Fraud, Issues, SEBI,
Dispute, Court etc.” One such search attempt should give an investor about any critical information that
might be present in the 	public domain.
Readers would notice that one of the results about Brooks Laboratories Limited is from Moneylife. In
current times, Moneylife is very active in writing about corporate frauds and it is highly likely that if any
listed company has been involved in any issue, then Moneylife would have covered it on its website.
Therefore, investors may use the keyword “Moneylife” as well to search for the issues related to any
company.
The check of promoters’ background for Brooks Laboratories Limited reflected that they were in	volved in
defrauding public investor in their IPO and have 	syphoned 	off the investor’s money from the company. As
per the below article in Businessline, SEBI found them guilty and imposed penalties on them.

-- 135 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
135 |	135 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
After learning about the frauds conducted by the promoters, I decided against invested in Brooks
Laboratories Limited.
Thus, investors would notice that a 	simple Google search could be very 	useful tool in assessing management
quality of any company. Therefore, one 	of the essential tools for any investor is 	to do a background check
of company’s promoters at Google, to assess whether they are shareholder friendly.
Over time, investors would notice that such background search results bring out key information about
promoters. Let’s see 	an example where the results point out to positive things about the promoter:
Manappuram Finance Limited	Manappuram Finance Limited
(Disclosure: I 	am invested in Manappuram Finance Limited)
Manappuram Finance Limited faced heat from the regulator Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in 2012 when
RBI asked it to 	stop using its branches to collect deposits from public on behalf of Manappuram Agro Farms
Limited (MAGRO). MAGRO is an entity owned by the promoter of Manappuram Finance Limited, Mr
V.P. Nandakumar. Let’s see the way event unfolded over the next few days:
1. 	February 7, 2012: RBI bans MFL and MAGRO from accepting deposits
2. 	February 10, 2012: Manappuram replies after the board meeting

-- 136 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
136 |	136 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The investor would notice that the company took the notice from RBI seriously and within a few days
clarified its stance 	about RBI’s 	instructions.
1. 	It clarified its intention of fully complying with the regulator’s instructions by dissociating itself
from MAGRO
2. 	Mr Nandakumar assured that he would honour all the liabilities towards the depositors of MAGRO
3. 	And 	most 	importantly, 	Manappuram 	Finance 	Limited 	established 	a 	committee 	under 	the
chairmanship of Mr Jagdish Kapoor, former deputy governor of RBI and 	chairman of HDFC Bank
to 	improve 	the 	governance 	standards 	of 	the 	company. 	Moreover, 	reputed 	companies 	like
Amarchand Mangaldas and KPMG were appointed to help this 	committee.
These actions reflected the intention of the company to comply with the regulator’s intentions in letter and
spirit in sharp contrast to some other 	corporates who try all the options under the 	sun to fight regulators be
it in courts or media.
 	March 14, 2012: Mr Nandakumar writes to the board of Manappuram Finance Limited about his
plan to sell a stake in the company to pay outstanding depositors of MAGRO:
 	March 15, 2012, Press Release: Marquee PE investors led by Baring India, Sequoia Capital, and
Siguler Guff buy 4.75% of Manappuram Finance 	Limited from Promoter on the stock exchange.
Thus we see that the promoters of Manappuram Finance Limited accepted the directions of RBI, stopped
collecting the deposits, took steps to enhance the corporate governance, raised funds by selling personal
stake in the company and then deposited the money in an escrow account with a public sector bank as the
source from which outstanding deposits would be paid on maturity.

-- 137 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
137 |	137 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
These steps took care of interests of every stakeholder: MAGRO depositors and Manappuram Finance
Limited & its shareholders. And all these 	events happened within a short period of about one 	month.
Such events establish that the promoter kept in mind the interest of outside stakeholders while taking his
decisions, which is one of the 	essential qualities to look for while investing in any company.
As we notice that 	bad habits persist in people similarly, we notice that 	good habits also persist. We would
notice that it was not the first time when Mr 	Nandakumar had kept the interest of public shareholders above
his own:
In this interview published on Rediff in November 2011, Mr Nandakumar talks about the event post the	IPO of Manappuram Finance Limited in 	1995:
Mr Nandakumar had started Manappuram Finance Limited in 1992 with a capital of 	₹10 lakh. He used to
add his money to the capital every year so that the capital grew. Then NBFCs required a minimum of 	₹3
crore paid-up capital to list at the BSE.
In 1995, Manappuram Finance Limited achieve a capital of about 	₹1.25 crore. Mr Nandakumar asked for
small investments from his family members and friends and could raise another 	₹1.75 Cr. to meet the
regulatory requirement for the IPO.
However, as mentioned in the interview, soon after the IPO, the share price reduced from 	₹10 to 	₹8 per
share and the investors started asking him to compensate for the losses. Mr Nandakumar bought back the
shares that traded in the market for 	₹8, at 	₹10 from these investors to keep his 	word.
This is in stark contrast to the case of Brooks Laboratories Limited, which defrauded investors and
syphoned off the money from public investors.
Therefore, looking at the contrasting cases of Brooks Laboratories Limited and Manappuram Finance
Limited, an investor would appreciate the different kinds of managements that are present in the listed
companies’ marketplace. The investor would also appreciate the need for differentiating between these

-- 138 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
138 |	138 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
managements and the key role that a background check can play in avoiding bad managements and find out
good managements.
Therefore, a background check by way of Google search is the first step for assessing the management of
any company, which every investor should mandatorily do.
The salary taken by the promoter/management of the company is one of the key parameters that can give
critical insights into the management intentions.
Salary/remuneration data of promoter/management/directors is provided by the company in annual 	Report.
This data is not available in the public financial sources like screener/Moneycontrol etc. Therefore, it is
essential for investors to read the annual reports to 	assess the management on this parameter.
After analysing many companies as part of my stock 	selection process and for answering queries of readers,
I notice that the usual salary range 	for promoter directors/management is about 2-4% of net profit after 	tax
(PAT). The salary generally contains 2% 	commission on PAT and a 	fixed monthly component along with
other perquisites.
Let us see the 	examples of performance of two companies and 	the salaries being taken by their promoters:
An investor can see the sharp contrast between the salaries being taken by promoters of ESS DEE
Aluminium Limited and Ambika Cotton 	Mills Limited.

-- 139 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
139 |	139 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Remuneration of Mr Sudip Dutta, the promoter of ESS DEE Aluminium Limited has increased from 	₹3 Cr.
in FY2010 to 	₹9.5 Cr. in FY2014 whereas the net profit of the company has decreased from 	₹182 cr. to
₹76 cr. over 	the same period. The salary as 	a percentage of net profits has increased from 2% 	in FY2010 to
12% in FY2014.
An investor might question the basis of the increase in remuneration of the promoter even in the scenario
of declining profits. Such kind of remuneration practices that are not linked to the performance of the
company effectively serve as a means for the promoters to benefit at the cost of company shareholders.
On the contrary, if an investor analyses the remuneration pattern of Mr P. V. Chandran, the promoter of
Ambika Cotton Mills Limited, then she notices that the salary 	of Mr Chandran:
 	is in the range of 2%-4% of net profits, which is the average range for most of the listed entities,
 	has increased only in the years when the profits have witnessed an increase. 	In the years, when the
profits did not increase, the salary remained constant.
 	the salary increased beyond 	₹0.8 cr. in FY2014 when the profits of the company increased to 	₹48
cr. which was more 	than the previous high watermark of 	₹41 cr. achieved in FY2011.
ESS DEE Aluminium Limited came into my investment radar in 2013, however, after 	analysing it I decided
against investing in its shares. The high salary 	of the promoter which was 	continuously increasing without
a proportionate increase in company’s performance wasone of the primary reasons for 	avoiding investment
in ESS DEE Aluminium Limited.
Recently, when I revisited the company, then I noticed that the 	company is reeling under debt of about 	₹500
cr. and has been 	making losses since last 2 quarters (September and December 2015) and its share 	price has
declined from about 	₹750 in February 2014 to about 	₹90 in May 2016.
Ambika Cotton Mills Limited came into my investment horizon in September 2014. I liked many aspects
of the company.
Out of multiple factors that I 	liked about Ambika Cotton Mills Limited, the reasonable salary being 	drawn
by Mr Chandra 	along with 	the moderate 	level of salaries being 	paid by the company 	to potential 	successors
(daughters of Mr Chandran), 	was an important parameter that helped me 	take the final investment decision
about the company.
(Disclosure: I am still invested in shares of Ambika Cotton Mills Limited)
As I have mentioned in the chapter above that bad habits persist, similarly, good habits also persist in
people.
We saw another example of this in December 	2015 when Ambika Cotton Mills Limited filed the following
notification in stock exchanges:

-- 140 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
140 |	140 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The notification mentioned that Mr P. V. Chandran has decided against accepting the commission part of
his remuneration, which was calculated at 2% of the net profits of Ambika Cotton Mills Limited. This
notice meant that Mr Chandran would be taking only the fixed component of his salary, which is about 	₹2
lac per month.
On seeing this notice, one of 	the celebrated investors in Ambika Cotton Mills Limited, Prof. 	Sanjay Bakshi,
wrote a thank you 	note to Mr 	Chandran appreciating his kind gesture towards minority shareholders. This
is what Mr Chandran wrote back to Prof. Bakshi:
Mr Chandran highlighted that he is satisfied with the dividend that he 	receives from Ambika Cotton Mills
Limited, just like minority shareholders and that he does 	not want to receive 	any special treatment different
from other shareholders. Mr Chandran stresses upon living up to the faith reposed by minority shareholders
in him.
I calculated that the promoters of Ambika Cotton Mills Limited would receive about 	₹4.28 cr. in the
dividend in FY2016 for their 48.63% stake 	in the company. 	₹4.28 cr. per annum seems sufficient for living
a good lifestyle in India unless one plans to live very lavish life associated with private jets and parties at
private islands.
I respect such managements, who respect the minority shareholders (Ambika Cotton Mills Limited) and
don’t mind taking a financial hit to keep their words (Manappuram Finance Limited). I like to invest in the

-- 141 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
141 |	141 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
companies run by such managements and stay invested as their partner in the growth of the business over
long periods.
Related party transactions section is one of the essential parts of the annual report that every investor should
analyse in detail for every 	company that she plans to 	study. 	This section discloses a summary of all the
transaction/balances at year end for the 	dealings that the company made with promoters and their 	personal
entities, joint ventures etc. during the year.
Related party transaction section is a goldmine of the information for assessment of any management. By
studying each transaction in this section, an investor can conclude whether the promoters are benefiting
from the company at 	the cost of minority shareholders.
Let’s analyse the related party transactions of a company:
Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited	Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited
Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited founded in 1988, is a Mumbai-based small-cap company with a
market cap of about 	₹45 cr. The company is a manufacturer of fans: AC Axial Fans, DC brushless fans,
condenser cooling, evaporator, no frost, water cooler and gear 	motors.
I came to know about Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited, when one of the readers of the website,
Susheel Kapoor, asked me a 	query about his analysis of the company.
While reading the annual report of Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited for 	FY2015, an investor notices
that the company has sought shareholder’s approval for an agreement, which the company has already
entered into with M/s Excelum Enterprises. The agreement is for sale & purchase, payment of commission
on sales including overseas sales and reimbursement of expenses to 	Excelum Enterprises.
Excelum Enterprises is owned by Mr Kunal Tanna, who is the husband of Ms Nanny Tanna. Ms Nanny
Tanna is the daughter of founder promoter & chairman of Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited, Mr

-- 142 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
142 |	142 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Kishore Chand Talwar. Therefore, we 	notice that Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited is 	entering into
a transaction with the son-in-law of the founder promoter of the company.
When an investor analyses the annual report further, then she notices that until last year (FY2014), Mr
Kunal Tanna was working at Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited, as the Vice President 	– 	International
Business. To an outside observer, the current arrangement of payment of commission on sales to Excelum
Enterprises by Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited seems like paying to Excelum for the skill that its
proprietor (Mr Kunal Tanna) has learnt by working at Rexnord itself.
Moreover, a look at 	the salary structure of the 	promoter family for FY2014 highlights that Mr Kunal Tanna
was being paid the highest remuneration in the company even higher than the salary of founder promoter
& Chairman Mr Kishore Chand Talwar.
I believe that it 	is good if relatives of the 	promoter join the company as employees/directors and contribute
to the growth of the business and take a commensurate salary for their contribution. Family members at key
positions 	ensure 	continuity 	of 	the 	business 	as 	well 	as 	relatively 	stable 	loyalties 	when 	compared 	to
professionals who keep on shifting their loyalties by giving 	90 day notice periods.
However, the investor should become circumspect when she sees the promoter family members entering
into contractual agreements with the company. This is because, as in case of Rexnord Electronics &
Controls Limited, when two members of the family, a 	father-in-law, and a son-in-law sit across the table to
decide what percentage of commission would be paid to the company of son-in-law, then the minority
shareholder can only pray that they would 	have her best interest in their mind.
The cases of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited, Cairn India Limited and Maruti Suzuki India Limited,
which have been discussed in the first chapter on assessing management quality, should serve as a caution
for investors before investing in companies that have a 	lot of related party transactions.

-- 143 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
143 |	143 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
With this, we have come 	to end of 	this chapter that highlighted some of the important tools for 	assessment
of management quality:
1. 	Promoters’ 	background check
2. 	Promoters’ salary
3. 	Related party transaction
In subsequent chapters, I 	would discuss remaining critical tools which an investor should use 	to differentiate
a good management from a bad management.

-- 144 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
144 |	144 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
In the previous chapter we discussed the 	following tools for management assessment:
1. 	Promoters’ background check
2. 	Promoters’ salary
3. 	Related party transaction
The current chapter is a continuation of the discussion of the key steps/tools that investors should use to
find out a good management and avoid bad management. An investor should read these carefully and use
them in her 	stock analysis process so that she may avoid 	falling into the trap 	of unscrupulous managements
that try to benefit at 	the cost of minority shareholders:
Warrants are like options which are issued to select shareholders by the company that gives these
shareholders a right to convert these warrants into shares of the company at a predetermined price. Like
options, warrants come with an expiry date i.e. the period in which the warrants can be converted.
Over the years, promoters/majority shareholder have been treating warrants as a means to give special
treatment to themselves. The special treatment might be related to pocketing risk-free gains and to
gain/increase stake through backdoor channels.
This usually happens in cases where the 	warrants are issued and become convertible right from 	the date of
issuance. In cases where such immediately convertible warrants are issued at a discount to the market price
of the stocks of the company, then it 	amount to handing over free money to promoters/majority shareholders
as promoters do not need to anything else other than convert the warrants into shares the same day and sell
these shares into the market to 	pocket the amount of discount as a 	risk-free gain.
Even though the allotment price of warrants is guided by statutory regulations by SEBI and the price of
allotment would be in compliance with the regulations, however, the point to note here is that if the
promoters would 	have tried 	to buy shares from the market, then they 	would not 	have got 	it at the 	prevailing
price. 	Instead, 	the 	news 	of 	an 	attempt 	by 	promoters 	to 	buy 	shares 	from 	the 	market 	would 	have 	led 	to
significant increase in share price and in turn leading to an increase in the cost of acquisition of shares to
the promoter.
However, by way of warrants, this effect of an increase in share price of the company is reversed. The
increase in share price which would ideally lead 	to a higher cost of 	acquisition of shares (if promoters would
have bought shares from the market). However, through warrants, by freezing the cost price of shares at a

-- 145 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
145 |	145 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
pre-determined price, the promoters convert the impact of the increase in share price to their advantage by
getting a call option payoff.
Many companies have resorted to such issuance of warrants. Let’s see the example of one such company:
Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited	Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited
Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited made the following disclosure in its annual report for 	FY2015:
As per the disclosure, at September 23, 2014, Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited had allotted
3,478,800 warrants to its promoters at a price of 	₹13.40. Each of these warrants was convertible into one
equity share of the company. The promoters could convert these warrants into equity shares at any time
within 18 months from the date 	of allotment (September 23, 2014).
The eligibility to immediately convert the warrants is the key here because the closing market price of
shares of Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited at September 23, 2014, is 	₹23.34. This effectively means
that the promoters can convert the warrants allotted to them on September 23, 2014, the very same day at
₹13.40 and sell the resultant equity shares received into the market at 	₹23.34 and pocket the difference of
₹9.94 per share as 	a risk-free gain, which ideally would have been their cost of acquisition of shares, if 	they
would have tried to buy shares from secondary market as 	the market would have immediately increased the
share price. (Promoters got rights to 3,478,800 shares 	through warrants, whereas the average daily trading
volume for Rexnord on the 	stock exchange is only a few thousand shares).
The total risk-free gain pertaining to the issued 3,478,800 warrants amount to 	₹3.36 cr., which is the free
money handed over to the 	promoters by the company.
This amounts to a loss 	of minority shareholders as the company has sold its 	₹23.34 worth of asset at a price
of 	₹13.40. Therefore, investors should always compare the allotment price of warrants with the market
price of the shares of the company.
Let’s see what further benefit the warrants bestow upon the promoters/majority shareholders.
In FY2015, the promoters of Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited increased their shareholding from
46.47% at March 31, 2014, to 51.46% at March 31, 2015, by increasing their shareholding by 888,300
shares. This move is very significant from the perspective of promoters as it gives them a majority in the
shareholding of the company.
However, when an investor analyses deeper, then she comes to know that the entire increase of 888,300
shares in the holding of promoters had happened by way of conversion of warrants at December 13, 2014,

-- 146 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
146 |	146 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
when the promoters had 	converted 1,098,300 warrants into equity shares of 	Rexnord Electronics & Controls
Limited.
The issue to be focused here is that promoters have acquired these additional shares on December 13, 2014,
at the warrant conversion price of 	₹13.40 instead of the market price of 	₹22.85 for the shares of Rexnord
Electronics & Controls Limited on that day.
Investors who have spent some time in equity markets would realize that when the promoters start to buy
shares in their company, the market sees it as a very positive sign and it increases the market price	
immediately. However, in the case of Rexnord Electronics & Controls Limited, the promoters instead of
paying a 	premium to 	market price to increase their 	stake in 	the company, got 	these shares 	at a 	deep discount
to the market price.
Therefore, effectively the 	non-promoter shareholders, including retail shareholders, of Rexnord 	Electronics
& Controls Limited had subsidized the purchase of shares by the promoters. And this was made possible
by an ingenious instrument: Warrants!
Therefore, whenever an investor is analysing a company and she comes across issuance of warrants to
promoters/majority shareholders, 	then 	she 	should analyse 	the 	issuance and 	exercise of 	these 	warrants to
assess whether the management/promoter/majority shareholders is benefitting at the 	cost of minority/retail
shareholders.
Running a business as well as investment in equities demands long-term vision. A promoter/manager is
expected to create wealth for the shareholders and take decisions that are beneficial for the business over
the long term and not be primarily concerned about short-term implications. Similarly, a long-term value
investor should consider holding her investments over many years and not get worried about periods of
share price declines in the interim period.
However, many times we see that the promoters/managers are constantly worried about the share price of
the company, which is heavily influenced by daily level changes in the operating environment. Such kind
of management is hardly willing to take the strong decisions that might be needed for 	the long-term benefit
of the business and in turn 	for shareholders.
Therefore, an investor should always analyse past decisions of the promoters/managers to assess whether
their decisions have been motivated by long-term vision or 	the short-term share price fluctuations.
Let’s see a recent incident, which presented a pertinent example to this issue.
DCB Bank	DCB Bank

-- 147 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
147 |	147 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
DCB Bank has its srcins in the merger of many co-operative banks in the 1930s. It was granted the
scheduled bank license by the Reserve 	Bank of India in 1995. 	Renowned Tata group bought 4.6% in DCB
Bank in 2007.
Potential 100bagger:	Potential 100bagger:
DCB Bank is covered by many big brokerages and has been a favourite among many of them to the extent
that Motilal Oswal Securities in its 19th Annual Wealth Creation Study (2009-14), released in December
2014, selected DCB Bank as a 	stock with a potential of giving 100 times return to the shareholder on their	investment.
DCB Bank had a market cap of 	₹2,900 cr. then and effectively the analyst at Motilal Oswal assessed that
the Bank has the potential of becoming a 	₹290,000 cr. market cap company (A few of the comparative
companies to this market cap today, May 28, 2016, are: HDFC Bank 	₹300,000 cr., ITC 	₹290,000 cr. and
Infosys 	₹286,000 cr.)
The analyst pointed out that in the evaluation of a 	common stock, the management is 90%, industry is 9%
and other factors are 1%. I completely agree with this belief and therefore assume that the analyst which
assessed DCB Bank for the 	report, would have dedicated at least 90% of 	the research time in assessing the
management of DCB Bank.
On October 13, 2015, DCB Bank came up 	with its future business strategy and informed the public through
stock exchange filings:

-- 148 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
148 |	148 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.

-- 149 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
149 |	149 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
DCB Bank stated that:
 	it plans to increase the branch expansion speed from earlier 25-30 branches per year to about 150
branches within next 	one year along with various other technology 	initiatives
 	It had done detailed planning for this business strategy and expects that the cost ratios and in turn
profits 	would 	be 	negatively 	impacted 	in 	the 	short 	term 	horizon 	of 	about 	2-3 	years 	but 	these
decisions would create long-term wealth for the shareholders from FY2019 	onwards.
The Bank has done in-depth planning by assessing various parameters like probable break even, payback,
return on equity, return on assets etc. and the management seemed to be in the know of the steps that they
are taking. The management seemed an 	ideal one, which prioritizes long-term interests of the business over
the short term incentives. I find that such bold managements are in rarity now a days and appreciate such
managements.
However, the markets were spooked by this announcement. The share price of DCB Bank tumbled 30% 	in
a span of two days from 	₹133.45 at October 13, 2015, to 	₹92.35 at October 15, 2015.
The reaction of stock market started 	with the report of Kotak Securities, which downgraded DCB Bank to
“Sell”:

-- 150 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
150 |	150 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Kotak labelled 	the management strategy as “very dangerous…..disappointing shift in their strategy”
In quick succession, Edelweiss downgraded DCB Bank to sell.
However, the real shocker was next to come when Motilal Oswal Securities, which has cherished DCB
Bank as a potential 100bagger, downgraded it to a “Sell”.
Any long term investor would be surprised to read the opinion of Motilal Oswal Securities in its “Sell”
recommendation. It stated that despite acknowledging that the business strategy of DCB Bank is beneficial
to business in the long term, we are recommending a “Sell”.
So much for 	the long-term vision of the market analysts!
It takes 20.5 years for an investment to grow to 100 bagger if the share price grows at 25% each year. 	20.5
years is a very 	long period, which is sufficient enough for every bit of 	external and internal environment of
any company to undergo a change. The changed business strategy of DCB Bank within one year of the
study led the stock analysts to downgrade a potential 100bagger to “Sell”. Ifail to understand whether the
stock analysts expected the management and business environment to remain unchanged for 20.5 	years
DCB Bank responds:	DCB Bank responds:
The story is not yet over.
Soon thereafter, DCB Bank filed another announcement to stock exchanges on October 15, 	2015:

-- 151 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
151 |	151 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
This announcement meant that the business plan, which seemed to 	have been devised well after a 	detailed
background work, proper research with possible challenges in execution and their responses in place, was
changed based on feedback from analysts. To stress, 	this was the feedback from investors and analysts who

-- 152 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
152 |	152 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
might not have worked in a bank 	branch and would have hardly done the research and hard 	work that DCB
Bank staff might have done to 	devise the business strategy.
This was a complete “U” turn from the earlier strength and boldness expressed by the management. This
demanded a deeper assessment.
One possible answer seemed to lie in the annual report for FY2015 on the page detailing the employee
stock options outstanding for the Bank.
It showed that at the end of FY2015, DCB Bank employees had about 1.1 cr. (11 million) options
outstanding, which were exercisable at a weighted price of 	₹47.29.
On October 13, 2015, when DCB Bank’s share price was₹133, these options (ESOPs) had a value of about
₹95 cr. to their holders. And as per the prevalent corporate culture, a huge majority of these ESOPs are
expected to be in the hand of top very few senior management employees.
On October 15, 2015, when the DCB Bank’s share price fell to₹92, the value of these 1.1 cr. options had
declined to 	₹50 cr. That is a decline in value of a whopping 	₹45 cr. and that too primarily from the hands
of top very few 	senior management employees.
A decline of 	₹45 cr. in wealth (whether real or notional) is very significant for any 	salaried employee. This
significant decline in value of ESOPs presents one 	probable explanation to the almost U-turn that the 	DCB
Bank management did on its business strategy based on apparent “Analyst” feedback.
So much for the long-term vision of the management! Neither the analysts nor the management is willing
to bear the short term pain for long term gains.
Let’s see how the market responded to the volte face done by DCB Bank management:

-- 153 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
153 |	153 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
(*the stock price chart represents the data 	until March 31, 2016, prepared for 	the presentation at Moneylife.
At May 28, 2016, the stock price of DCB Bank at BSE is 	₹93.60)
The stock price, which 	is continuously hovering around 	₹70-80 potentially reflects the shaken faith of 	the
markets in the management of DCB Bank.
Therefore, it is always advised that whenever any investor analyses any company, then it becomes
imperative for her to 	assess whether the past decisions of the 	promoters/managers have been motivated by
long-term business vision or short-term share price fluctuations. Reading annual reports, the presence of
significant amount of ESOPs and going through stock exchange filings can help 	her reach a 	decision about
such behavior of promoters/managers.
One of the key features of stock investment that attract investors is the dividend payment by companies.
Stock investors hold regularly dividend paying companies in high 	regards and believe that the 	managements
that consistently pay dividends are 	shareholder friendly.
However, before an investor firms up such a belief about any management, it is crucial to assess that the
company is paying these dividends out of the free 	cash available.
Free cash flow (FCF) can be calculated by deducting capital expenditure (Capex) done by the company
from its cash flow 	from operations (CFO):
FCF = CFO - Capex	FCF = CFO - Capex

-- 154 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
154 |	154 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
It is highly likely that if 	a company does not have free 	cash flow available after meeting 	capex requirements
from its operating cash flows, then it 	is meeting the requirements of funds to pay 	dividends to shareholders
by raising debt from lenders.
And investors would agree that if a company keeps on paying dividend consistently by raising debt, then
sooner or later the debt will reach such levels that lenders would find it difficult to keep giving loans to it
and the dividend payments would not remain sustainable.
Similarly, if the company does not have positive free cash flow and uses debt to pay dividends, then
hypothetically there is no limit on the amount of dividend it can 	pay to shareholders. The dividend amount
is only limited by the debt that the company can raise, be it a dividend of 	₹1 per share or 	₹100 per share
the only thing that the management needs to do it 	to find a lender who can 	give it a loan and it 	would give
the money to shareholders. The operating efficiency of the company does 	not remain the key parameter for
such managements to pay dividends to shareholders.
Therefore, it is advised that investors should not take any comfort from the amount or consistency of
dividend payments by a company that uses debt to 	pay dividends. Moreover, many times such 	debt-funded
dividend payments are to benefit the promoter/majority shareholder at the cost of the company and in turn
at the cost of 	minority shareholders.
Let us see an 	example of a company, which is 	paying dividends out of debt proceeds:
The cash flow from operations (CFO) of Tata 	Steel for 10 years (FY2006-15) stood at 	₹105,565 cr. whereas
it did capital expenditure (Capex) of about 	₹126,073 cr. over the same period, which included massive
₹49,713 cr. in FY2008 primarily to acquire the European steel giant “Corus”.
The net result was that over the 10 years (FY2006-15), Tata Steel had a negative free cash flow (FCF) of
₹20,508 cr. (FCF = CFO 	– 	Capex), whereas it kept on paying dividends consistently every year and paid
out about 	₹9,547 cr. of dividends in 10 	years (FY2006-15).

-- 155 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
155 |	155 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
As the company did not have free 	cash flow to pay dividends to its shareholders, it was not surprising that
the dividend payments primarily came from debt, 	which increased from 	₹3,377 cr. in FY2006 to whopping
₹80,701 cr. in FY2015.
There is always a limit to 	which a company can take debt as 	with increasing debt levels, the lenders would
become increasingly worried about the 	health of the 	company and in turn, 	would stop giving further debt
to the company. Therefore, such debt-funded dividends are not sustainable in the long term and investors
should not derive any comfort from them.
With this, we have come to end of the chapter, where I stress the importance and steps of management
assessment while making stock investments. Until now, we have covered some of the important tools for
assessment of management quality:
1. 	Promoters’ background check
2. 	Promoters’ salary
3. 	Related party transaction
4. 	Warrants
5. 	Management focused on share price
6. 	Dividend payments
An example how 	drvijaymalik.com is helping investors:
It feels fulfilling to notice that 	drvijaymalik.com is 	able to help investors to 	make opinions and in turn take
investment decisions that are good for the long term.

-- 156 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
156 |	156 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
In the previous chapters, we have 	learnt the following tools for management assessment:
1) 	Promoters’ background check
2) 	Promoters’ salary
3) 	Related party transaction
4) 	Warrants and their misuses
5) 	Management focused on the share price	
6) 	Dividends funded by debt
The current chapter is a continuation of the discussion of the key steps/tools that investors should use to
find out a good management and avoid bad management. An investor should read these carefully and use
them in her 	stock analysis process so that she may avoid 	falling into the trap of 	unscrupulous managements
that try to benefit at 	the cost of minority shareholders:
Many times, instead of working hard to grow the business managements resort to the shortcuts and
manipulate the publically reported financial results to create a false 	image that the company has 	been doing
very well. However, sooner than 	later, invariably such accounting manipulations are caught and the market
heavily punishes the stocks of such companies.
In such cases, it 	is the minority shareholder who loses her entire investment in 	the company without any of
her faults. Therefore, identifying accounting juggleries/shenanigans becomes a very important aspect of
stock analysis.
This book contains a separate chapter highlighting key tools available to investors for identifying key
features of the financials, which have 	a high probability of containing manipulations.
These key tools are:
Cumulative Cash from Operations (cCFO) falling short of 	cumulative Profit after Tax (cPAT) 	in the past
1. 	Increasing Receivables Days/Days of sales 	outstanding (DSO)
2. 	Fast buildup of inventory/decreasing inventory turnover
3. 	Free Cash Flow
4. 	Frequent 	Acquisitions
5. 	Abnormal/supernormal 	performance
6. 	Frequent changes in 	accounting policies/disclosures

-- 157 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
157 |	157 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
After going through the above-mentioned chapter 	and reading the book mentioned therein “Financial
Shenanigans: How to Detect Accounting Gimmicks & Frauds in Financial Reports”, an investor would
realize that there are certainly red flags, which most of the manufactured balance sheets contain. If an
investor is able to detect these red 	flags and avoids investing in such companies, then she would be 	able to
steer clear of most of the accounting frauds.
These red flags are:
This situation primarily appears in 	companies, which book sales aggressively, sometimes even fictitiously.
Such sales do not 	result in receipt of cash and 	therefore, lead to increasing account receivables/debtors/trade
receivables. However, as the company has 	to incur operational costs like employee costs, 	utility costs etc.,
it typically relies on debt to meet 	its expenses.
Therefore, unless an investor personally knows that the 	promoters/majority shareholder in such 	companies
is a person with integrity and that the buyers are facing a genuine financial crunch, which is leading to
delayed payments, she should be better off 	avoiding such companies.
Such a situation is usually avoided by companies as raising funds by debt and keep them as cash without
deployment is a losing scenario as it has a financial cost attached to it. Debt invariably has a higher cost
than the bank FDs or liquid investments in which cash is usually held by the companies. Therefore, an
investor should do extra due diligence whenever she is 	faced with such a situation in her 	target company.
The company might have many explanations to keep high cash alongside high debt on its books. Most
common answer is that the company is looking for a strategic acquisition and therefore keeping the cash
chest ready in case any opportunity arises. However, most of the times companies do not find good
acquisition targets soon and therefore the continued presence of high cash with high debt raises concerns
for shareholders.
In cases of accounting frauds, it has been seen that the debt 	shown is a true figure whereas the cash shown
in the balance sheet turns out to be fictitious. Most of the times such cash has already been syphoned off
from the 	company by the promoters/majority shareholders/management.
Therefore, it companies with high cash 	balances along with high debt should always be subjected to 	deeper
scrutiny by the investors.
Acquisitions are usually done by companies to get bargain deals in times of stress in the industry.
Acquisitions are done by overseas companies in new markets/geographies to get access to the approvals,
patents that the target company would have 	in order to 	shorten the time 	to enter a 	new market. 	However,
acquisitions always pose a challenge to investors as the merging of accounts of two companies using
multiple assumptions, mark to markets, revaluation of assets etc. completely mixes up 	the accounts.

-- 158 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
158 |	158 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Therefore, it becomes utmost difficult to assess the real financial position by analysing the accounts of the
merged entity. No wonder, many accounting frauds remain hidden in the books of serial acquirers and
companies find acquisitions as the most convenient method of fooling the analyst community about their
real financial position.
Still, 	it’s ok if a company acquires a target company once in a 	while for business reasons and assimilates &
nurtures the target company as a part of its own entity. However, things start to become suspicious if the
acquirer acts like a hedge 	fund and frequently buys & disposes of 	companies.
Ideally, an investor should avoid companies that are in a habit of growing only through acquisitions. She
would do great good to her hard earned money as invariably serial acquirers are known to give negative
surprises to shareholders.
Assessing the competence of promoters/management is a key aspect of stock analysis. However, the
competence must not be confused with the educational qualifications of the promoter/management. Time
and again evidence have 	proved that educational qualifications tell little about managerial competence and
integrity with which a person would treat its business & shareholders.
Instead, an investor should focus on assessing the project execution skills of the promoter/management.
She should analyse the business expansion done by organic growth and ignore the capacity additions
through acquisitions while she assesses the competence of the management.
The investor can take help of multiple public sources of information to assess the project execution skills
of promoters like annual reports, 	credit rating reports, milestones on the company 	website etc. She should
focus on organic additions to business capacities and take note of 	the various warning signs.
Warning signs in promoter/management competence would present in the form of:
1. 	Company abandoned or cancelled its projects in the past
2. 	Company was expelled from projects
3. 	Frequent project execution delays and cost overruns
The investor should prefer buying shares of companies that are 	run by managements, which have 	displayed
timely completion of the projects within promised timelines.
Promoters’/majority shareholders’ faith in the business gets reflected by two parameters:

-- 159 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
159 |	159 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Ideally, the promoters should have a majority shareholding in the company i.e. more than 50%. However,
more than the absolute level of shareholding I believe that the trend of change in promoters’ shareholding
carries more significance.
A trend of increasing shareholding by promoters/majority shareholders over recent quarters/years should
be seen as positive and vice versa.
Many times, it is noticed that promoters dilute their stake a lot in initial years to fund the business expansion
of the company. Promoters then try to make up 	for the lost stake earlier by buying shares from the dividends,	
which they get once the company starts generating cash flow for its shareholders.
Therefore, unless the promoters’ stake is very low i.e. less than 25%, an increasing trend of shareholding
over the years shows promoters’ faith in the business. On the contrary, the companies where promoters
have been reducing their stake should be subject to deeper analysis despite such promoters holding more
than 50% stake in the 	company.
Equity investing is a long-term concept where an investor is expected to hold on to 	the good companies for
years, sometimes even for decades. In such a long-term association with the company, the assessment of
management succession becomes paramount. Therefore, an investor should always study the succession
plans in depth before investing her hard earned money 	in stocks of any company.
Companies 	usually 	follow 	either/mix 	of 	two 	approaches 	for 	management 	succession: 	bringing 	in
promoters’ children/young 	family members or professionals 	in the company.
There is no ideal succession plan as 	both have their pros and cons.
Companies with a lot of family members in the senior management run the risk of related party transactions
at the cost of interests of minority shareholders as discussed in the previous chapters. Whereas the
companies with all the professionals at senior management positions run the risk of business decisions with
a short-term focus on share 	price as mentioned in earlier 	chapters:
Companies with predominantly professionals’ presence suffer from lack of loyalty as professionals keep
on shifting their loyalties by handing over notice periods of 90 days 	(i.e. resignations and job changes).
Therefore, I prefer companies, which have a 	promoter in charge of the company and who has delegated day
to day functioning of the company to professionals hired from the market who bring in 	fresh perspectives,
market intelligence and competitors’knowledge base to the company.
With this, we have come to the end of the section on the importance and steps of management assessment
while making stock investments. We have covered some of the important tools for assessment of
management quality:
1. 	Promoters’ background check

-- 160 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
160 |	160 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
2. 	Promoters’ 	salary
3. 	Related party transaction
4. 	Warrants
5. 	Management focused on share price
6. 	Dividend payments
7. 	Accounting juggleries
8. 	Competence
9. 	Promoters’ faith in the business
These are the critical tools which an investor should use to differentiate a good management from a bad
management. I believe that if an investor assesses the management of her target company on these
parameters and 	finds that 	the promoter/management is 	scoring well on 	all these parameters, then 	she has
found a company which is being run 	by a competent and shareholder friendly management.
In such a case, if the company meets all the other parameters like financial, business, valuation and
operating performance/efficiency parameters, then she should buy shares of 	the company and look forward
to a long association with the promoters.
An investor should always keep in mind that:
Investment in a great business might be futile if its management is not shareholder friendly	Investment in a great business might be futile if its management is not shareholder friendly
At the end, I 	would like to give one last advice 	to investors:
“Never Rely on the Awards”	“Never Rely on the Awards”
The Golden Peacock Award for corporate governance in 2002 was won by Satyam Computer Services	
Limited, which later on turned out to 	be the biggest corporate frauds in India.
Therefore, invariably, an investor should do her own research 	while investing her hard earned money.

-- 161 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
161 |	161 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We all have faced situations in life where our decisions have gone wrong. Be it personal or professional
life, our assumptions are proven erroneous and the outcome is different from what we had anticipated.
Stock investing is no different!
We can never be certain that the stock, which we have selected with significant hard work, would always
go up in price. No one 	can assure us that the company, which the stock represents, would keep on growing
the way it did in 	the past. All these elements bring an 	aspect of risk in investing.
The risk is that 	the company or the market will prove an investor’s analysis wrong and instead of generating
wealth from the markets, she would end up losing her hard earned money. And if not handled diligently,
these errors might put her financial freedom 	at stake.
One of the all-time best investors, Benjamin Graham, dealt with this situation lucidly in his bo 	ok “The
Intelligent Investor”. Graham highlighted that no matter how careful an investor is, she can never eliminate
the risk of being wrong. To tackle this situation Graham introduced the concept of “Margin of Safety” in
investing.
Graham presented Margin of Safety as a tool of minimizing 	the odds of error in an investor’s favour. He
stressed that Margin of Safety meant never overpaying for a stock, however attractive the investment
opportunity may seem. The Margin of 	safety would provide a cushion for 	unforeseen adverse developments
affecting the investment decision.
Graham in his book “The Intelligent Investor”, first published in 1949, provided a simple tool for investors
to measure the margin of 	safety in a stock investment. He advised investors to compare 	earnings yield of a
stock to the yield on the 	bonds (Government Securities in India) to arrive at the 	margin of safety.
Since the days of Graham, the concept of Margin of Safety has been interpreted differently by different
investors and many of them have come up with their own parameters for determining the Margin of Safety
in an investment. Be it Warren Buffett, Peter Lynch or any other investor, everyone follows certain
guidelines to assess, what qualities would protect their investment in case things do not turn out the way
they have anticipated.
Over last 10 years of investing in equity markets and after analysing hundreds of companies & stocks, I
find that there are three different parameters, which provide an objectively measurable assessment of
margin of safety. These parameters identify the margin of safety built in the purchase price as well as in the
business model of any company and have served me well.
In the current chapter, I 	would detail these parameters of assessing Margin of Safety in any stock investment
along with the tools to measure it.
A) The Margin of Safety in the	A) The Margin of Safety in the 	purchase price:	purchase price:

-- 162 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
162 |	162 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
 	Earnings Yield being higher than 10 years bond (Government Securities) yield
B) The Margin of Safety in the	B) The Margin of Safety in the 	business of the company:	business of the company:
 	Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR) being higher that current sales growth
 	Positive Free Cash Flow (FCF) 	post meeting entire capex
Let’s now deal with each of these three parameters of Margin of Safety one by one.
Earnings Yield (EY) as a measure of Margin of Safety, was proposed by Benjamin Graham in his book
“The Intelligent Investor”. Earnings Yield is calculated asthe inverse of Price to Earnings (P/E) ratio i.e.
E/P ratio. It is 	calculated by dividing the earnings per share (EPS) with the 	current market price (CMP).
EY provides an idea 	about the earning/returns that a stock would produce for 	every 	₹ 	invested by the buyer
in it.
Benjamin Graham advised comparing the EY with Treasury Yield (USA). Similar yield to compare in India
is the ongoing yield on Government Securities (G-Sec). The higher the difference between EY and G-
Sec/Treasury Yield, the safer is 	the stock investment.
To illustrate, suppose an investor buys a stock of company ABC Ltd at 	₹100. If EPS of ABC Ltd is 	₹10
then its P/E ratio would be 10 	(100/10) and its EY would be 1/10 or 	10%. As current G-Sec yield is about
7.50-8.00%, ABC Ltd is a good investment as per 	Graham’s criteria.
Suppose, after the investor buys the stock of ABC Ltd., its price falls to 	₹50, then the P/E ratio would
become 5 	and the 	EY would 	become 1/5 	i.e. 20%. 	EY of 	20% would attract 	more and 	more investors to
shift money from bonds markets 	and use it to 	buy stocks of ABC Ltd. 	as it provides an opportunity to invest
money at a yield of 20% against G-Sec yield of 8%. This new demand for stocks of ABC Ltd. would
increase its stock price and limit 	the downfall.
The higher the difference between EY and G-Sec/Treasury yield at the time of purchase of the stock, the
higher is the cushion in times of adversity i.e. higher Margin of Safety. Therefore, the stocks with higher
earnings yield (EY) i.e. the ones with low P/E ratio, would provide a higher cushion to the investor during
tough times.
The above argument makes me choose my stock in the segment of P/E ratio of 10 or less as these stocks
provide a 	margin of 	safety. However, 	it 	remains critical 	to 	differentiate fundamentally 	sound companies
available at low P/E ratio from 	the troubled companies, which form the junkyard of 	stock markets.

-- 163 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
163 |	163 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR) is a 	measure of the growth potential inherent in the business model
of a 	company, which it can achieve 	using resources generated through its current profits without relying on
external sources of funds like debt or 	equity dilution.
Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR) utilizes 	the features of a company’s business modellike net profit
margin (NPM), dividend payout ratio (DPR), depreciation (Dep) and net fixed asset turnover (NFAT) to
arrive at the sales 	growth rate that the company can achieve without leveraging itself.
The formula for calculating SSGR is:
SSGR = [(1-Dep) +	SSGR = [(1-Dep) + 	NFAT*NPM*(1-DPR)]	NFAT*NPM*(1-DPR)] 	–– 	11
It can be inferred from the above formula, the companies with higher profitability (NPM), operating
efficiency (high NFAT) and lower dividend payouts (DPR) would have higher self-sustainable growth rate
(SSGR).
An investor should compare the SSGR of the company with its current sales growth to see if there is any
margin of safety in the business of model of the company:
It means that the company’s business features (NPM, NFAT & DPR) allow it to grow its s	ales at a higher
rate than the current growth rate. In the case of economic downturn, the company can safely:
1. 	reduce its profitability to generate higher demand
2. 	reduce dividends to conserve funds to make additional investments and
3. 	invest in fixed assets to improve its plant 	& machinery/technology (leading to lower NFAT)
in an attempt to 	maintain its current sales growth rate.
All the above steps would provide funds from business activities and the company would not have to rely
on external sources like debt or 	equity dilution to get funds to maintain its current growth rate.
Therefore, the company with higher SSGR can increase their 	sales growth rate in normal times and maintain
current sales growth rate during tough times without leveraging their balance sheet 	by taking on debt.
The examples of FDC Limited and Container Corporation Limited have been discussed in the chapter on
SSGR. These companies have SSGR higher than their current sales growth and therefore are able to stay
debt free while maintaining their growth.
Additionally, we may see the performance of 	another company: 	VST Tillers Tractors Limited:	VST Tillers Tractors Limited:

-- 164 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
164 |	164 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The business model of VST Tillers Tractors Limited provides it with the ability to grow at a much higher
growth rate (SSGR=55-65%) than its achieved sales growth rate of 17% over past 10 years. VST Tillers
Tractors Limited has a 	significant cushion to reduce its profitability, dividend payout ratio and fixed asset
turnover during tough times and still 	not fall into a 	debt trap, thereby providing a 	resilient business model
and a high margin of safety to the investor.
The investor would notice that such companies are already growing more than 	their business potential. Such
companies usually rely on raising debt or diluting their equity to generate funds needed for investments to
generate the sales growth.
In the chapter on SSGR, we have seen examples of Castex Technologies Limited (erstwhile Amtek India
Limited) and Glenmark Pharmaceuticals 	Limited.
These companies are growing at a sales growth rate which is much higher than their business potential
(SSGR). The result was 	that these companies had to consistently raise 	debt/dilute equity to raise funds for
investments to generate the growth, as their operational business was not able to 	generate required amount
of funds.
Let us see an additional example of LT Foods Limited, a manufacturer 	of popular branded rice “Daawat”:

-- 165 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
165 |	165 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
LT Foods Limited has been growing its sales at a growth rate of about 22-23% over last 10 years, however,
its business model indicates that in the current situation it is not able to sustain any growth beyond 7% in
the business as its SSGR is almost 0-7%. LT 	Foods Limited has to raise almost the entire amount of funds
to support its growth from additional sources like debt.
It is not surprising that LT Foods Limited has 	witnessed its debt increase from 	₹224 cr. in FY2006 to 	₹1,692
cr. in FY2015.
Rising debt levels increase the bankruptcy risk of the business during tough times as 	we have seen recently
in the case of Electrosteel Steels Limited, which has been taken over by its lenders.
It means that 	company is already using its business potential to the 	maximum and the company would find
it hard to maintain its current growth rate in tough business scenarios characterized by industry-wide
declining profitability. Similarly, the company would have to 	raise additional funds by way of 	debt or equity
for funding, in case the 	company decides to increase its growth further.
Therefore, I find that the business model of the companies with SSGR higher than the current growth rate
is more resilient and sustainable during downturns. Thus SSGR forms key parameter to assess the margin
of safety in the business model of a company in my stock analysis.
I advise investors to prefer companies that have self-sustainable growth rate (SSGR) higher than their
achieved sales growth rate over those companies that have SSGR less than their sales growth rate. The
higher the SSGR, the better. High SSGR 	increases the margin of safety in the business and the capacity to
bleed in times of stress without putting the 	entire business and its shareholders at risk.

-- 166 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
166 |	166 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
I believe that free cash flow (FCF) 	is the ultimate measure of investibility of any company. It is calculated
as the surplus cash with the 	company after meeting its capital expenditure requirements.
FCF = CFO	FCF = CFO 	–– 	Capex	Capex
Where,
 	CFO = cash flow from operations

Capex = capital expenditure including maintenance capex and capital work in 	progress (CWIP)
Capex for any year can be calculated as the difference between gross fixed assets (GFA) & CWIP at the
start of the year and end of the year. It can also be calculated by deducting net fixed assets & CWIP at the
start of the year from the net fixed assets & CWIP at end of the year and adding back the depreciation for
the year.
Capex:	Capex:
(GFA + CWIP) at the end of the year	(GFA + CWIP) at the end of the year 	–– 	(GFA + CWIP) at the start of the year	(GFA + CWIP) at the start of the year
OR	OR
(NFA + CWIP) at the end of the year	(NFA + CWIP) at the end of the year 	–– 	(NFA + CWIP) at the start of the year + Depreciation for	(NFA + CWIP) at the start of the year + Depreciation for
the year	the year
Free cash flow (FCF) 	is the most essential feature of 	any business as it amounts to the 	surplus/discretionary
cash that the business/company is able to generate for its shareholders. FCF is the 	equivalent of savings for
a household.
If we as households are not able to manage our expenses within our means of income, i.e. are not able to
save anything, then our financial health is going to suffer a lot in future. We would have to borrow from
relative/banks etc. to meet our requirements. The debt, which we raise to fund our expenses, needs to be
paid at predefined intervals 	irrespective of the fact whether we are able to 	save in future/have our 	job intact
or not. The debt 	pressure increases the bankruptcy risk and leads to stress in our 	lives.
The scenario is exactly the same 	for companies as well.
If a company does not have positive free cash flow, it means that it is spending beyond its means. Such a
company would have to raise funds from additional sources like debt or equity dilution to meet its
requirements. These funds, if raised 	from debt, would decrease profitability by interest expense and 	increase
bankruptcy risk and if raised from equity, would lead to dilution of the stake of existing shareholders.
In both the cases the situation of companies continuously raising debt/equity to meet their cash flow
requirements becomes less attractive for investors as compared to the companies that are able to meet their
funds requirements from their cash flow from 	operations.

-- 167 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
167 |	167 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
It might be argued that the investments done today by the company would lead to revenue & profits in the
future and would generate wealth for 	the shareholders.
This argument is a valid argument just like an educational loan for an individual. An education funded by
the loan is an investment, which has the potential of increasing the skills set, earnings ability and future
wealth of a person and therefore is considered a good investment.
Similarly, for companies the investments in plants & 	machinery and technology is like an educational loan,
which increases future earnings potential. Therefore, we should not worry about the situation where a
company is not able to generate positive FCF for a few year. Such companies might be taking education
loans to generate future wealth. However, if a company is not able to generate positive FCF over long
periods of time (I assess them over last 10 years), then the company resembles a continuous cash guzzling
machine.
It resembles an individual who is continuously garnering degrees after degrees costing millions of
rupees/dollar, without ever putting those skills to commercial use. Or those degrees might be 	fake and cash
has already gone down the drain! In both the cases, the investment done is not of much use.
I, as a 	shareholder, expect the companies I own, to 	be cash generating machines. Their business should be
a source of cash for me and not the other way round. Therefore, positive free cash flow generation by a
company over last 10 years, is one of the key criteria for stock selection for me.
Once an investor has identified a company with positive cash flow, then she should further analyse what
proportion of 	cash flow 	from operations (CFO) over last 10 	years, it 	has used 	in capital 	expenditure (capex)
and what proportion is available as free 	cash flow (FCF).
I find that the companies, which have achieved their sales 	growth in the past by using the minimum amount
of CFO as capex have a significantly higher margin of safety over the companies which have used almost
all CFO. Needless to say, the companies, which have their capex much higher than their entire CFO over
last 10 years (i.e. negative FCF), have very low/negative margin of safety.
An illustration:	An illustration:
Let’s take an example of two similar sized companies (A & B) growing their sales at a similar rate (say
15%) in the past. Let’s assume that both the companies A & B,generated the same amount of CFO over
last 10 years (say 	₹100 cr).
Let’s assume that on analysing thecapex done by these companies in last 10 years, we find company A has
achieved the sales growth (15%) by doing a capex of 	₹50 cr (50% of CFO), thereby, generating an FCF of
₹50 cr. On 	the contrary, we find that the company B has achieved the same sales 	growth (15%) by doing a
capex of 	₹100 cr (100% of CFO), thereby, generating NIL FCF.

-- 168 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
168 |	168 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
When the tough times strike the economy in future, 	the profitability of companies would decline, customers
would delay the payment of cash, suppliers would ask for immediate cash and the credit from all sources
would become costly.
In such a situation, company A, whose business model permitted it to achieve the sales growth by using
only 50% of CFO in 	the past, would be able to bear 	the impact of reducing cash inflows as customers cancel
their orders, squeeze profit margins and delay the payments. Theoretically, company A can tolerate its
profitability and cash collections (CFO) declining by 50%, before signs of stress start becoming visible in
its business operations & 	planned investments.
On the other hand, company B, which was already investing 100% of its CFO to generate its sales, would
find even the slightest decline in its cash flow (CFO), impacting its operations. Declining orders, reduced
profitability 	and 	delayed 	payments 	from 	customers 	would 	make 	it 	difficult 	for 	company 	B 	to 	make
payments 	to 	its 	suppliers 	and 	do 	planned 	investments. 	Company 	B 	would 	have 	to 	rely 	on 	additional
debt/equity raising to fund its 	cash requirements.
If there is another company C, which was already using more than 100% of its CFO in capex, thereby
having negative free cash flow (FCF). Such 	a company would already be sagging down under a lot 	of debt
burden. In 	the tough 	economic situation described 	above, company C 	would find 	difficult to 	continue its
business operations as usual as sources of cash dry up. The additional debt, which was essential to sustain
its business model, would become further costly.
Companies like C are prime candidates for bankruptcy in tough times as they find it difficult to service
existing debt, make payments to suppliers. Such companies, usually being capex heavy and operating at
low-profit margins, find it difficult 	to garner additional business by reducing 	their profitability as it would
push them into losses. Such companies rarely have any margin of safety built in their business model.
Let us see the real life examples of companies with different levels of free cash flow (FCF) generation:
Hindustan Unilever Limited (HUL) is a prime example of a company, which has been able to generate a
lot of free cash flow from its operations over the years.

-- 169 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
169 |	169 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Over last 10 years (FY2006-15), HUL has generated cash flow from operations (CFO) of 	₹26,298 cr.
whereas it needed to invest only 	₹3,718 cr. in its business and thereby leaving 	₹22,579 cr. in hand of the
company as discretionary cash to 	reward its shareholders. No wonder, the 	company could provide dividends
to the tune of 	₹20,543 cr. over last 10 	years despite remaining virtually debt free.
HUL presents an example of a very attractive business, which offers 86% of the cash generated by its
owners as free cash without compromising on its future growth. This represents a huge amount of margin
of safety built into the business.
During tough times, HUL can reduce prices 	of its products, offer higher credit period to 	its customers, pay
suppliers promptly to attract and retain quality suppliers without impacting its balance sheet. It would not
need to raise debt for such crisis strategies; only a slight reduction in the dividend payouts to the
shareholders would provide enough of money to fund the emergency measures.
No wonder, the market loves it and 	its shares trade at P/E ratio of the high 40s.
On the contrary, we can see the example of Tata Steel Limited, which has been acting as a cash guzzler for
its shareholders:
Over last 10 years (FY2006-15), Tata Steel Limited has generated cash flow from operations of 	₹105,565
cr. However, its business required it to invest whopping 	₹126,073 cr in the company, thereby eliminating
any chance of free 	cash flow. The company, on 	the contrary, had to raise debt to 	fund its capital expenditure
requirements. Total debt of the company increased from 	₹3,377 cr. in FY2006 to 	₹80,701 cr. in FY2015.
If an investor analyses deeply, then she would notice that the entire dividend of 	₹9,547 cr., paid by the
company over last 10 years has been funded by debt.
If the economic scenario deteriorates further, then the company would have to meet its cash requirements	
by raising 	further debt 	or equity. 	In case 	its lenders 	or shareholders, 	do not 	provide this 	capital, then 	the
company would face a 	difficult time to tide over the crisis.

-- 170 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
170 |	170 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Looking at the above situation, it is clear that Tata Steel Limited does not have a significant margin of
safety built into its business model and the market 	has realized it.
No wonder, the stock is available at a P/E ratio of low single digits.
Therefore, an investor can see that positive FCF is a necessity before considering any company for
investment and the fact that higher the FCF as a proportion of CFO, the higher the margin of safety.
After reading our entire discussion, an investor would realize 	that there are two 	major sources of the margin
of safety in a 	stock investment, which can help an investment in the adverse 	scenarios in future:
A)	A) 	The margin of sa	The margin of safety built in the purchase	fety built in the purchase 	price of the investor:	price of the investor:
 	Determined by the Earnings Yield of the stock. The higher the earnings yield than the ongoing
treasury/G-Sec yield, the higher the margin of safety.
B) The margin of safety built in the	B) The margin of safety built in the 	business model of the company:	business model of the company:
 	Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR): Higher the SSGR than its 	achieved sales growth rate, higher
the margin of safety
 	Free Cash Flow (FCF): 	Higher the proportion of cash flow from operations (CFO) available as free
cash flow (FCF) post meeting all the capital expenditure requirements, higher is the margin of
safety.
An investor should always look out for companies with high SSGR, FCF and available at good earnings
yield.
The investor would notice that most of 	the well-known companies in the market, 	which have a high margin
of safety in their business, are already trading at high P/E multiples and therefore preclude any margin of
safety in the purchase price. Similarly, among the well-known companies, most of the companies, which
are available at low P/E ratio, thereby providing a margin 	of safety in the purchase price, do not have 	a high
margin of safety in the 	business.
Therefore, it becomes critical for the investor to search for companies, which have a high margin of safety
in the business and at the same time, are available at low P/E ratios. If an investor is able to find such
companies, then she can certainly generate a 	significant amount of wealth through stock markets.
Such companies, which have a combination of a high margin of safety in the business as well as the high
margin of safety in the purchase price, are prime candidates to turn out to be multibaggers in future.
It is to emphasize that an investor does not need to find hundreds of such companies. Only a few of them
over her entire lifetime can do wonders to her wealth. Even the best investor of all times, Warren Buffett,
acknowledges that most of his wealth has come from 	only a handful of 	stock picking decisions turning out	
to be right.

-- 171 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
171 |	171 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Credit rating agencies are independent third party organizations approved by market regulators, which
provide an 	opinion about 	the credit strength 	of 	any borrower 	or 	its debt 	instrument. Their 	role has 	been
widely ingrained in debt markets as the pricing of 	loans/debt facilities to any borrower is based on its credit
strength.
Almost all the lenders use the credit ratings assigned by such independent credit rating agencies for their
appraisal and pricing of the borrowing entities. Similarly, debt market participants decide about the	
sufficiency of yield being offered on market instruments like non-convertible debentures (NCDs) or
commercial paper (CPs) by 	issuing companies by looking at their credit rating.
In India, there are 	many approved credit rating agencies. Some of the popular ones are CRISIL (an 	alliance
of Standard & 	Poor’s), ICRA (an alliance of Moody’s), India 	Ratings (Ind-Ra, an alliance of Fitch), CARE
(owned by Indian Financial Institutions), Brickwork etc., which are very active in assigning credit ratings
and preparing credit reports in Indian financial markets. Detailed credit reports are available only to their
paid subscribers; 	however, summary 	credit reports are available publically 	on their website and serve good
purpose for retail investors.
Credit ratings vary on a spectrum of AAA to D where AAA means strongest credit strength/lowest
possibility 	of 	default 	and 	D 	means 	lowest 	credit 	strength/already 	defaulted 	on 	repayment 	obligations.
Various credit ratings are AAA, AA+,AA,AA-,A+,A,A-,BBB+,BBB,BBB-,BB,B and D. As we move from
AAA to D, the credit risk increases and the possibility of the borrower defaulting on its debt servicing
obligations increases.
As mentioned above, investors in debt markets make extensive use of credit ratings. Credit ratings have
been predominantly thought as relevant for debt 	market participants; however, I believe that they 	provide
a very insightful avenue for equity investors as well.
There are many reasons, which make me believe that every stock market investor should read the credit
rating report of her target company. She 	should not restrict herself to the latest credit rating report, 	but read
all the historical credit rating reports available in public domain and understand the story of movement in
the credit profile of the target company.
Let us first understand the critical features that credit rating reports contain, which are helpful for equity
analysts and then analyse the credit reports for a sample company as 	a case study to establish its importance.

-- 172 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
172 |	172 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The credit rating report serves as 	a key resource of 	business information, which has been verified by a third
party. Many times, a company does not disclose many of these details on its website or in its annual report
considering them as 	sensitive information.
Such information might include 	market position, kind of 	relationships with different stakeholders, business
characteristics, the comparative positioning of its brands, status 	of its competitors, details of 	key customers
and its business strategy.
Credit reports also contain details about the factors leading to the business advantage of the company
(MOAT), 	capacity 	utilization 	levels, 	future 	expansion 	plans 	and 	updates 	of 	ongoing 	plant
constructions/debottlenecking including the status of financial 	closure of such 	expansions.
This is one of the reasons; I read credit rating reports of all the companies I analyse.
Credit rating analysts have access to most of 	the information privy only to the company management, which
is not available in public domain but is critical to assess the credit strength of any company. A
summary/glimpse of critical sections of such information, which every investor can get in the credit report,
sometimes tilts the investing decision in a company’s favour or against it.
Such information might include terms of contracts & agreements with buyers & suppliers including cost
escalation clauses & formulas, contingency clauses etc., plant capacities & 	their utilization levels with sales
volumes etc.
An equity investor or equity research analyst would not get an opportunity to go through these contracts,
unlike the credit rating analysts.
Credit rating agencies based on their knowledge of the industry, peers and company analysis, provide the
users with a snapshot of key parameters that are expected to affect the performance of the company.
Agencies also highlight the key risk factors that might impact the performance of a company negatively,
which should be monitored carefully by the investors.
Credit rating reports are prepared by financial analysts who analyse the company’s financial information
including annual reports while preparing the reports. It serves 	as another check for the investor 	that another
independent third party has checked the financial information apart from company’s statutory auditor.

-- 173 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
173 |	173 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Credit rating might serve as an 	independent benchmark for an investor to compare her 	analysis. E.g., if an
investor believes that the fundamental position of her target company has improved over the years but on
the contrary, finds that the company’s credit rating is going down, then she should recheck heranalysis to
find out the reasons for 	such disparity.
If an investor notices that the credit rating of a company has improved over the years e.g. from BBB- to
A+, then she can be reasonably certain that the company has shown good business performance and as a
result, its fundamental strength has 	improved.
This is a critical point. I believe that an investor should focus more on the direction of movement of the
credit rating of any company rather 	than its absolute credit rating level. This is not to 	say that absolute level
is irrelevant. However, I would 	look favorably at a company “A” whose 	credit rating has improved from
BBB- to A- 	over the years than another company “B” whose credit rating has deteriorated from AA+ to A
over the years, even though the current credit rating of company B is higher than that of company A.
Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited	Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited
Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited, an 	Indian insoluble sulphur manufacturer, has been rated by credit
rating company ICRA Limited. Credit rating reports of Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited from 2008
are available on the 	website of ICRA Limited.
The following has been the financial performance of Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited over last 10
years:

-- 174 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
174 |	174 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Now let us analyse the key information that credit rating reports of Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited
have to provide to the stock market investor, which makes studying these reports essential for the stock
market investor both as part of 	initial appraisal as well as regular monitoring exercise.
The 2008 report has the following gist as company background, which summarizes its entire history of
Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited in a 	few words:
"Oriental Carbon & Chemicals (OCCL) was incorporated in 1978 as Dharuhera
Chemicals Limited (DCL) and in 1983 DCL 	was merged with Oriental Carbon Limited
(OCL), a group company engaged in the production of Carbon Black, to form OCCL.
Since 1980, DCL’s Chemicals &fertilizers division in Dharuhera was engaged in the
production 	of 	sulphuric 	acid, 	oleum, 	single 	super 	phosphate 	(SSP), 	sodium 	silico
fluoride and stabilized liquid sulphur.
However, the fertilizer business was deemed unviable; the company exited from the
fertilizer business in 2001, and Sulphuric Acid & Oleum production was retained. In
1994, OCCL had set-up a manufacturing facility for the production of Insoluble
Sulphur, which is now the flagship product of the company. In 2000, the company
realigned its focus to concentrate on Insoluble Sulphur and in the process divested its
Carbon Black Unit in favour of 	Continental Carbon Company of USA.
OCCL has a production capacity of 10,000 metric tonnes per annum (MTPA) for
Insoluble Sulphur and 41,250 MTPA for Sulphuric Acid & Oleum."

-- 175 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
175 |	175 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Credit reports of ICRA Limited provide an investor with a gist of the market standing of Oriental Carbon
& Chemicals Limited viz-a-viz its competitors.
2008:	2008:
"OCCL enjoys a dominant market position in the domestic market by virtue of being
the only local manufacturer of Insoluble Sulphur in the country. It also enjoys a
favourable market position as the ‘Second Alternate Supplier’ in the global industry,
which is dominated by Flexsys of USA.."
Credit reports give an investor about the kind of relationship Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited has
with its customers.
2012 (September):	2012 (September):
"The reaffirmation of the ratings reflects long track 	record of OCCL in the 	business of
producing 	Insoluble 	Sulphur 	(IS), 	its 	established 	market 	position 	in 	the 	domestic
industry 	by virtue of 	being 	the leading 	domestic manufacturer of 	IS, and 	strong
customer base comprising major tyre manufacturers across the world and long-term
relations with them."
The reports provide an investor key information about the customers of Oriental Carbon & Chemicals
Limited, which many times is not disclosed by the company on its website or its annual report as it might
consider it as 	sensitive information:
2008:	2008:
"…with 	strong 	customer 	base 	comprising 	major 	tyre 	companies 	in 	the 	world 	like
Continental 	AG, 	Goodyear, 	Bridgestone, 	Kumho 	Tyres 	etc. 	for 	exports 	and 	Apollo
Tyres, Bridgestone, J K Tyres, MRF Tyres, Ceat Tyres, Goodyear India, Birla Tyres
etc. in the domestic market."
2015:	2015:
"The 	company’s 	customer 	base 	comprises 	almost 	all 	major 	tyre 	manufacturing
companies of the 	world with whom it 	enjoys long-standing relationships"
Credit reports of Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited provide an investor with the critical summary of	
the business strategy being followed by the company. These inputs can be very vital while understanding
the business of the target company and 	thereby taking the investment decision.

-- 176 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
176 |	176 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
2008:	2008:
"In order to move away from the commoditized nature of the product, OCCL has
ventured 	into 	manufacturing 	of tailor-made grades 	of Insoluble Sulphur, which
command a premium over conventional grades of Insoluble Sulphur as the European
markets are witnessing a shift from conventional grades to value-added grades of
Insoluble Sulphur
OCCL is also engaged in the 	production of Sulphuric Acid & Oleum, which constitutes
about 20% of the total sales of the company. Since these products are sold to selective
customers locally, the company doesn’t compete with larger players in the industry."
2013:	2013:
"OCCL is steadily focusing on increasing the 	share of value-added grades 	of Insoluble
Sulphur, which command a premium over the 	conventional grades."
Credit reports of Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited, provide a glimpse into whether the company has
a sustained business advantage over its peers and if yes, then what are the key factors leading to such
advantage:
2013:	2013:
"Closely guarded technology, capital-intensive nature of the business, hazardous nature
of Sulphur and long gestation period of about one and half years involving quality
checks and approvals from the tyre manufacturers for commercial production act as the
entry barriers for other players in 	the industry"
2008:	2008:
"OCCL was engaged in the production of Carbon Black which was hived off to
Continental Carbon Limited in 2000 but the company continued to benefit from the
business relations with tyre companies in the country"
Many times, companies might not disclose the capacity utilization levels, considering it a sensitive
information. An investor might get such information as part of the 	credit rating reports.
2013:	2013:
"In 2012-13, the company set up a greenfield project at Mundra SEZ with a capacity to
produce 	11,000 	MTPA 	of 	IS. 	The 	capacity 	utilization remained 	moderate 	at 	81% 	in
FY13 on the back of subdued demand from Europe, the key market for OCCL."

-- 177 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
177 |	177 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
This is one essential section of company’s performance, which is usually provided in credit reports of all
the companies. It provides the investor, most of the information required to assess the project execution
capability of company’s management & its track record, including any delays, overleveraging etc.
2008:	2008:
"OCCL has recently undertaken a debottlenecking project which would enable the
company to increase its existing capacity marginally by January 2009.
Going forward, OCCL plans to set up a manufacturing facility in Mundra SEZ. The
company expects to benefit from savings from freight for servicing of export orders and
other fiscal benefits on account of operations based in SEZ.
The capital outlay for the project is expected to be around 	₹750 million, which is
significant in comparison to the current size of the company and exposes the company
to project execution risk. However, the project is yet to 	achieve financial closure."
2009:	2009:
"The company is expected to implement the project in two phases. In the first phase,
the company would set up the 	facility with the capacity to produce 5,000 MTPA 	which
can be expanded to 10,000 MTPA in the second phase of the project.
Out of total capex of 	₹750 million for the phase I, OCCL plans to raise term loan of
around 	₹500 million, while the rest would be funded through internal accruals. The
company expects to achieve financial closure for the project by January 2010 and the
commercial production is expected to start from July 2011."
2012 (March):	2012 (March):
"The ratings, however, are constrained....residual project implementation risk for the
phase II 	of the 	Mundra Special 	Economic 	Zone (SEZ) project; 	which is 	partly mitigated
by the 	successful commissioning of 	the phase 	I without material 	time or 	cost overrun
and advanced stage of the phase II."
2012 (September):	2012 (September):
"OCCL had a production capacity of 12,000 metric tonnes per annum (MTPA) for
Insoluble Sulphur (IS) and 41,250 MTPA for Sulphuric Acid & Oleum as on 	March 31,
2011. However, the production capacity of IS has increased to 23,000 MTPA post
completion of Phase II of 	Mundra greenfield project in May 2012."

-- 178 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
178 |	178 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
As mentioned earlier, this is one of the most important reasons; I read credit rating reports of all the
companies I analyse.
Credit rating analysts have access to most of the information privy to the company management, which is
not available in public domain but is critical to 	assess the credit strength of any company.
Credit reports of Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited, over the years, have provided key inputs, which
help the investor understand the evolution of the business of the 	company over the years.
2008:	2008:
"OCCL’s inability to pass on the price increase in the past has negatively impacted its
performance. 	Although 	the 	company 	has 	now 	taken 	measures 	to 	pass 	on 	the 	price
increase by entering into quarterly contracts instead of annual contracts with customers,
yet it remains exposed to fluctuations in the prices."
2009:	2009:
"ICRA also notes that the sharp fluctuations in raw material (Sulphur and other
petroleum derivatives) prices had adversely impacted 	the profitability of the 	company
during 2007-08; however, the company has taken measures to pass on the raw material
price rise to 	the customers 	in a timely 	manner, which is reflected in 	the improvement in
the profitability of the company during 2008-09.
Since 2008-09, the company started entering 	into quarterly contracts instead of annual
contracts with customers to provide itself with the flexibility to pass on the raw material
price increase. 	This has 	resulted in 	significant improvement in 	the profitability of 	the
company in the last one and half years."
These inputs have helped the investors understand the sudden change in the operating profitability of
Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited
We can notice in 	the financial details of Oriental Carbon & 	Chemicals Limited that the operating margins,
which declined from 18% in FY2006 to 12% in FY2009, improved to 32% in FY2010 and have been stable
at about 25% since then. Therefore, the explanation for sudden improvement and stabilization of margins
of OCCL can be found in the credit rating report.
2013 (November):	2013 (November):
"In FY13, exceptional profit on the sale of Tarapur land along with reversal of profits
has helped the company to report a 	net profit."
This critical input helps investors understand the reasons for the improvement in the margins of Oriental
Carbon & Chemicals Limited in 	FY2014.
2014:	2014:

-- 179 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
179 |	179 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
“The revision of the long-term rating reflects the increase in the scale of operations of
the company attributable to rise in sales volumes of Insoluble sulphur (IS) aided
primarily 	by more approvals from 	overseas customers….”
2015:	2015:
“….the company’s products are making inroads into the hitherto untapped but large
markets like the US where tyre manufacturers have been receptive in a bid to diversify
their suppliers from the one or two that they currently rely on for IS Supplies; the
increase in scale of operations of the company attributable to rise in sales volumes of
IS primarily due to more approvals from overseas customers…”
Credit reports of Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited help an investor understand the key factors
influencing the business performance of the company including the key risk parameters that need
continuous monitoring by the investors.
2008:	2008:
"The company is expected to benefit from 	the favourable prospects in the tyre industry
driven by radialisation of tyres as Insoluble Sulphur is a key ingredient for 	vulcanisation
of rubber."
2012 (September):	2012 (September):
"Going forward, the ability of OCCL to achieve 	optimal capacity utilisation for Mundra
plant in 	view of modest demand prospects and 	efficiently managing the higher working
capital requirements along with the improvement in operational performance of SDL
would be key 	rating sensitivities."
2009:	2009:
"The ratings, however, are constrained by the cyclical nature of the business and the
high capital intensity of the business leading to moderate return indicators in the past.
ICRA also takes note of the primarily debt-funded capital expenditure (capex) plan of
OCCL to set up a greenfield IS plant at Mundra Special Economic Zone (SEZ). As the
capex plan is large in relation to current balance sheet size of OCCL, the company is
exposed to significant project implementation risks."
2012 (March):	2012 (March):
"The rating watch follows the recent announcement of acquisition of 50% stakes in
Schrader Duncan Limited (SDL) by OCCL. 	The acquisition of relatively weaker entity

-- 180 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
180 |	180 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
SDL, 	which 	may 	become 	a 	subsidiary 	of 	OCCL, 	could 	adversely 	impact 	the
consolidated financials of the company.
2012 (September):	2012 (September):
“Post-acquisition, OCCL has also provided guarantees for the bank limits of SDL,
which ICRA has factored in while reaffirming the ratings. ICRA notes that, while the
acquisition 	of 	SDL, 	a 	financially 	weaker 	entity, 	would 	modestly 	impact 	the
consolidated financials of the company, its consolidated credit profile will not be
materially impacted because of the anticipated comfortable cash generation from its
own operations, which will render its key coverage metrics well within the current
rating category."
The fact of company’s financial statements having been analysed by a credit rating agency of repute and
there being no adverse comment about the accounting policies in the credit report provides another
independent check about the quality of accounting practices being followed by Oriental Carbon &
Chemicals Limited.
Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited has witnessed continuous improvement of revenue, profits, margins
and reduction in debt over the 	years. Alongside, the improvement of the 	credit rating of Oriental Carbon &
Chemicals Limited from BBB to A serves as a check that the fundamental position of the company has	
indeed improved over these years.
As mentioned above, the improvement of the credit rating of Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited from
BBB in 2008 to 	A in 2015, serves as 	a vital evidence that the company has been 	performing well financially
& operationally, thereby leading to improvement in the fundamental position of the company.
Thus, we can see that the even the summary credit reports of Oriental Carbon & Chemicals Limited
provided publically by ICRA Limited on its website contain very vital pieces of information, which might
or might not be available to investors from 	the company website, its annual reports, equity research reports
or other public sources. These inputs help an investor understand the business of Oriental Carbon &
Chemicals Limited in a better manner 	and take an informed investment decision.
Therefore, I suggest that an investor should read all the available the credit rating reports of all their target
companies, including the recent most as well as the historical reports. Reading credit rating reports will add
value to her analysis and help 	her take better investment decisions.

-- 181 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
181 |	181 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
In previous chapters, I have provided readers with key takeaways in form of crucial parameters that an
investor should use while analyzing stocks. 	Chapters on financial 	analysis, valuation analysis, business &
industry analysis and management analysis contained summary checklists that can be very handy for any
investor.
In the current chapter, I 	have compiled at one place 	the parameters that an investor should check each stock,
before investing her 	hard-earned savings. This chapter 	can serve 	as a 	final checklist for any 	stock market
investor, which will become very useful while doing a 	detailed analysis of stocks.
Criteria	Criteria 	Value	Value 	Remarks	Remarks
1 	Sales 	growth CAGR >15% for
last 7-10 years
Growth should be a consistent year on year. Ignore
companies where a sudden spurt of 	sales in one year
is confounding the 10 years performance.
Very high growth rates of >50% 	are unsustainable.
2 	Profitability 	NPM 	>8% Look for companies with sustained operating & 	net
profit margins over the years
3 	Tax 	payout 	>30%
The tax rate should be near general corporate tax
rate 	unless 	some 	specific 	tax 	incentives 	are
applicable to the company.
4 	Interest 	coverage 	>3
5 Debt to Equity
ratio < 0.5 Look for companies with D/E ratio of as low as
possible. Preferably zero debt
6 	Current 	ratio 	>1.25
7 	Cash 	flow 	CFO 	> 	0
Positive CFO is necessary.
It’s great if CFO meets the outflow for CFI and CFF
8 Cumulative PAT
vs. CFO cPAT ~ cCFO Cumulative PAT and CFO are similar for last 10
years

-- 182 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
182 |	182 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
1 	P/E 	ratio 	< 	10 	Such 	companies 	provide 	good 	margin 	of 	safety
2 P/E to Growth
ratio (PEG ratio) < 1
3 Earnings Yield
(EY)
> 10 year G-Sec
yield
EY should be greater than long-term government
bond yields or bank fixed deposit interest rates
4 	P/B 	ratio 	< 	1
However, I find P/B 	ratio irrelevant for sectors other
than financial services
5 Price to Sales
ratio (P/S ratio) < 1.5 James O’Shaughnessy: Buy if P/S ratio is < 1.5 and
sell if >3
6 Dividend Yield
(DY) > 0%
Higher the better.
DY of >5% is very attractive. However, do not
focus a lot on DY for companies in fast growth
phase
1 Comparison with
industry peers
Sales 	growth 	>
peers
The Company must show sales growth higher than
peers. 	If 	its 	sales 	growth 	is 	similar 	to 	peers, 	then
there is no Moat
2
Increase in
production
capacity and sales
volume
Production
capacity 	& 	sales
volume CAGR ~
Sales CAGR
Company 	must 	have 	shown 	increased 	market
penetration 	by 	selling 	higher 	volumes 	of 	its
product/service
3
Conversion of
sales growth into
profits
Profit 	CAGR 	~
Sales CAGR
A Moat would result in increasing profits with
increasing sales. Otherwise, sales growth is only a
result 	of 	unnecessary 	expansion 	or 	aggressive
marketing push, which would erode value in long
term
4 Conversion of
profits into cash cPAT ~ cCFO
If 	cPAT 	>> 	cCFO, 	then 	either 	the 	profits 	are
fictitious or the company is selling to any John Doe
for higher sales 	without having the ability to collect
money from them
5
Creation of value
for shareholders
from the profits
retained
The 	increase 	in
MCap in last 10	yrs. 	> 	Retained
profits 	in 	last 	10
yrs.
Otherwise, 	company 	is 	destroying 	wealth 	of
shareholders

-- 183 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
183 |	183 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
1
Background
check of
promoters &
directors
Web search There should not be 	any information questioning the
integrity of promoters & directors
2 Management
succession plans
Good 	succession
plan 	should 	be 	in
place
Salary being paid to potential successors should be
in line with their experience
3
Salary of
promoters vs. net
profits
No salary increase
with 	declining
profits/losses
promoter 	should 	not 	have 	a 	history 	of 	seeking
increase in remuneration when the profits of the
company declined in past
4 Project execution
skills
Green/brownfield
project execution
The company should have shown good project
execution skills with cost and time overruns.
Exclude 	capacity 	increase 	by 	mergers 	&
acquisitions.
5
Consistent
increase in
dividend
payments
Dividend 	CAGR
> 0
Dividends should be increasing with increase in
profits of the company
6 	Promoter
shareholding > 	51% 	Higher 	the 	better
7 Promoter buying
the shares Insider buying ++ If promoter of a company buys its shares, investors
should buy too
8 	FII 	shareholding 	~ 	0% 	the 	lower 	the 	better
1 Product
diversification Pure play
The company should be either a 	pure play (only one
business 	segment) 	or 	related 	products. 	Pure 	play
model ensures that the management is 	specialized in
what they are doing.
Entirely different unrelated products/services are a
strict NO. An investor should rather buy stocks of
different 	companies 	if 	she 	wants 	such
diversification.

-- 184 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
184 |	184 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
2 	Govt. 	influence
No 	govt.
interference 	in
profit making
No cap on profit returns or pricing of the product.
No compulsion to supply to certain clients.
MoS 	in
Purchas
e Price
Earnings 	Yield
(EY)
EY > 10 Yr G-Sec
Yield Higher the EY than 10 Yr G-Sec Yield, the better
MoS in
Busines
s Model
Self-Sustainable
Growth Rate
(SSGR)
SSGR > Achieved
Sales 	Growth
Rate
Higher the SSGR than achieved Sales Growth, the
better
Free 	Cash 	Flow
(FCF) FCF/CFO 	>> 	0 	Higher 	the 	FCF 	as 	proportion 	of 	CFO, 	the 	better
1 Credit Rating
History BBB- & above
Current credit rating should be minimum BBB-
Credit rating should have been improving over the
years
Investors should always keep in mind that, no checklist could ever be complete for doing stocks analysis.
However, the parameters in the above test any company and its stock on some of the tough performance
parameters. Hence, 	an investor can 	be reasonably certain 	that the 	stocks, which pass 	the above 	checklist,
have sound fundamentals and are available at reasonable valuations. If she diligently follows these	
parameters, invests only in stocks that 	promise good fundamentals and never 	overpays for them, then she
can be assured of good returns from her portfolio over the long term.
Temporary periods of stock price fluctuations, business cycles where even good companies would not be
able to maintain sales growth & profitability, would definitely come in between. However, the investor
should 	keep her patience and not act on impulse 	and stay invested in a company until 	the time the inherent
business strength of the company is intact. She would 	reap great benefits of such investing behavior.
No checklist is paramount. Hence, an investor should not restrict themselves to the parameters 	mentioned
above. She should read further about investment analysis and add/remove parameters from the above list
as per her 	understanding.
Monitoring stocks in an investor's portfolio is also equally important. An investor should delineate her
monitoring activities into ongoing activities, quarterly activities and annual activities. Therefore, 	this book
contains a chapter dedicated to monitoring of stocks in an investor’s portfolio.

-- 185 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
185 |	185 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Analyzing operating performance of any company is a critical step before taking any investment related
decision about any company. It tells an investor whether any company is improving its activities year on
year and should be a 	potential investment candidate or on 	the contrary, its performance is deteriorating with
time and any investment in its stock should be 	avoided.
I thank one of the readers of the 	website, Satya Prakash, for asking certain queries, which led to the idea of
writing this chapter containing the framework of analysis I use 	for assessing the operating performance of	
companies.
Past operating performance becomes critical, as it is the outcome of all the business strength (Moat) and
intellectual power (Management) any company has. If a company has been touted as the one with a huge
moat, however, does not deliver in terms of operating performance, then an investor should be quite wary
of relying on such claims. On the contrary, some hidden gems in the markets, which never get media
attention, have strong business advantages and managements and keep on showing improved operating
performance 	year 	on 	year. 	If 	an 	investor 	is 	able 	to 	analyse 	and 	judge 	the 	operating 	performance 	of 	a
company over years, then she can easily find out strong investment worthy stocks that can generate
significant wealth for her over long periods.
Past financial performance data is presented by the companies in their annual reports. 	Until now, it used to
be 	very 	cumbersome 	for 	an 	investor 	to 	collect 	such 	data, 	as 	it 	involved 	punching 	the 	data 	from 	annual
reports into a spreadsheet and analyzing it under 	different ratio/parameters.
However, currently, investors have different freely available tools, which provide the read 	to consume data
in spreadsheet format about different companies. An investor can download such data from these online
sources, analyse it using certain parameters, and come to know whether any company has been showing
improved/stagnating/deteriorating operating performance over the 	years.
In Indian stock markets, such data for past 10 years is provided by portals like Screener.in Morningstar.in
etc. Other foreign markets would have similar portals where 	an investor can get the financial performance
data of companies and analyse it.
A simple framework for analyzing operating performance takes it srcination from the basic premises of
the objective of the existence of 	any company, which is to grow the 	wealth of its shareholders. This premise
can be broken down into simpler steps, 	which a company needs to follow over 	its lifetime:
1. 	Companies need to grow,
2. 	Maintain or improve profitability,
3. 	Operate efficiently,
4. 	Convert profits into free cash and
5. 	Use this free cash to 	fund future growth.

-- 186 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
186 |	186 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Let us now understand the tools used to analyse the performance of any company over these parameters.
Ideally, an investor should analyse the data 	for past 10 years, 	which is easily available on above-mentioned
portals.
It is expected that 	every company, which would generate good returns for its shareholders, would grow its
business and produce increased sales year on year.
It can be measured through the compounded annual sales growth (CAGR) of sales over the years. The
investor should observe that such sales growth is consistent year on year, rather 	than an abnormal spike in
one or two years, 	which hide the otherwise poor performance of multiple years.
Profitability is measured by operating profit margins (OPM) and net profit margins (NPM) of any company
Operating Profit is the residual profit after deducting the cost of raw material, employee costs, sales &
general expenses etc. from the 	sales revenue of any year. 	It shows the profitability of any company before
the charges for capital structure (interest expense 	for debt raised) and capital intensity (depreciation) of any
business 	or 	taxes 	are 	deducted 	from 	sales 	revenue. 	OPM 	measures 	the 	profitability 	purely 	from 	core
operations of any company without factoring in the non-operating income like interest income or 	dividend
income.
Net Profit is the final amount remaining 	in the hands of 	equity shareholders 	after all possible expenses like
interest, depreciation, taxes etc. are deducted from total income (including operating sales revenue and non-
operating income). This amount is available to the company for either distributing to shareholders like
dividends or investing in company’s operations as shareholder’s incremental contribution in the business.
Analysis of both OPM and NPM are important while analyzing operating performance of any company.
Companies should show stable or improve profitability year on year. If profitability is not stable, it
fluctuates wildly year on year or is declining consistently, then an investor must delve deeper into
understanding the business dynamics of the company. If she is not able to find any satisfactory answer to
such undesirable patterns in profitability, then she should avoid this company and look for 	other investing
opportunities.
Honda SIEL Power Products Limited presents a 	case of increasing growth at the cost 	of profitability:

-- 187 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
187 |	187 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
There are many tools, which an investor can use to measure operating efficiency. However, I believe that
the following three tools would provide any investor with simple easy to apply parameter, which would
help her get the 	right conclusion in almost all the cases:
Inventory turnover ratio (ITR) measures the efficiency with which a company uses its inventory (raw
material, work in progress and finished goods) to 	convert it into final sales. It is 	measured by the formula:
Inventory turnover ratio = Sales / Average inventory at start and end of the year	Inventory turnover ratio = Sales / Average inventory at start and end of the year
Many investors use the cost of goods sold (COGS) instead of sales in the numerator for calculating ITR.
The financial analysis provides the investor with the flexibility to customize the ratio as per 	her preference.
Therefore, an investor may use either sales or COGS for ITR analysis, however, she should maintain
consistency while calculating & interpreting the 	ratio.
A higher ratio indicates that a company is able to rotate its inventory faster and its capital is not stuck in
inventory.
Ideally, Inventory turnover ratio should be stable or increase with improving performance. Declining
Inventory turnover ratio should raise the flags and 	an investor should delve deeper to understand its cause.
If the investor is 	not satisfied with the outcome then she should avoid investment in such 	company and look
for other opportunities.
The above-mentioned case of Honda SIEL Power Products Limited also represents a case of declining
inventory turnover.

-- 188 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
188 |	188 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Days of receivables outstanding or Receivables Days broadly reflects the average number of days 	in which
customers of any company pay their 	dues to the company. Receivables Days are 	calculated as:
Receivable Days = (Average account receivables at start and end of the year / Sales) *	Receivable Days = (Average account receivables at start and end of the year / Sales) * 	365	365
Ideally, the Receivables Days should be 	stable or declining. If it were 	increasing, then it would amount that
the company is not able to realize its dues 	from customers in time. This would amount to the company using
more of bank funding (working capital funding) to meet its day-to-day cash 	requirements. This would lead
to higher interest expense 	and lower profitability.
The above-mentioned case of Honda SIEL Power Products Limited also represents a case of increasing
Receivables Days.
Asset turnover ratio represents the efficiency with which a company utilizes its assets to produces goods
for sales. Different kinds of asset turnover ratios are in vogue for assessing the efficiency of capital
deployment by a company.
Most common of these ratios are Total Asset Turnover Ratio and Fixed Asset Turnover Ratio. I prefer using
Fixed Asset Turnover Ratio as it indicates the usage pattern of operative productive assets like plants and
machinery and excludes assets held in form 	of investments in third parties, cash etc.
Fixed Asset Turnover Ratio is calculated as:
Fixed Assets Turnover Ratio = Sales / Net fixed assets at the end of	Fixed Assets Turnover Ratio = Sales / Net fixed assets at the end of 	the year	the year
Many investors use the average of net fixed assets at the start and end of the year for arriving at Fixed
Assets Turnover Ratio, which is also right. An investor should do 	fine if she uses any of 	these formulas and
uses it consistently to compare results over the years.
The financial analysis allows sufficient leeway to investors to experiment with different ratios with
tweaking the existing ratios or creating altogether new ones if an 	investor believes that it might give a new
insight while analyzing a company.
Fixed Assets Turnover Ratio indicates how efficiency a company is using its assets. A Fixed Assets
Turnover Ratio of two indicates that every incremental investment of 	₹ 	1 in its plants a 	nd machinery would
increase its sales by 	₹ 	2. A higher Fixed Assets Turnover Ratio is always preferable and indicates the good
use of shareholders’ funds.
Ideally, Fixed Assets Turnover Ratio should be 	stable or increase with improving performance. Declining
Fixed Assets Turnover Ratio should raise the flags and an investor should delve deeper to understand its
cause. If the investor is not satisfied with the outcome then she 	should avoid investment in such a 	company
and look for other opportunities.

-- 189 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
189 |	189 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
An investor must read the case of Amtek India Limited discussed in this chapter. Amtek India Limited
presents 	a 	typical 	case 	of 	very 	low 	asset 	turnover 	in 	a 	highly 	capital-intensive 	business. 	Amtek 	India
Limited is losing because of very low asset turnover, as the business consumes far more cash than it
produces. This 	has led 	to the 	company increasing relying 	on debt 	to meet 	its cash 	requirements and 	as a
result, its debt has increased whopping 33 times in 	last 10 years.
Converting profits into free cash is very 	important for any company as it 	is the cash, which is 	going to add
value to the shareholders. It has 	been proved multiple times that companies go bankrupt not when they do
not have assets, but when they run out of cash.
An investor should compare cumulative profit after tax (PAT) of last 10 years with the cumulative cash
flow from operations (CFO) for the same 	period to assess whether the company is able 	to convert its profits
into free cash.
CFO is derived from PAT after adjusting PAT for non-operating expenses like interest, depreciation and
working capital changes.
If a company manages its working capital well, then ideally, its CFO should be higher than PAT because
of the impact from adding back interest and depreciation. Therefore, when we notice that over 10 years

-- 190 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
190 |	190 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
CFO of a company is less than the cumulative PAT it has declared, then it should raise flags. It would
indicate that the money is being stuck in 	working capital.
Money is most commonly stuck in working capital in the form of unrealized receivables from customers,
which is indicated by increasing receivables days or in the form of increasing inventory levels, which is
indicated by decreasing inventory turnover ratio.
If the profits are stuck in working capital and not available as free 	cash, it would reduce the cash available
for running day-to-day operations like payment to vendors, salaries to employees, interest & principal
payments on 	bank loans 	and capital 	expenditure for 	new plants. 	In such 	a 	scenario, the 	company would
have to rely on other sources of cash like equity or debt to fund its cash requirements. This would lead to
either equity dilution, thereby reducing stake of existing shareholders or increasing debt levels, which
would reduce profitability by higher interest costs and increase the risk of bankruptcy in case of tough
economic scenarios.
Therefore, conversion of profits into cash is 	necessary for any company to survive over 	long periods. If an
investor finds that a company is not able to do so, then she should study it in depth and in absence of any
satisfactory explanation, she should avoid investing in such a company and look for 	other opportunities.
The above-mentioned case of Honda SIEL Power Products Limited also represents a case of a company,
which is not able to 	convert its profits into free cash.
An investor should always keep an eye on 	sources of funds that a company uses for 	its expansion plans or
acquisitions. Ideally, a company should use the cash produced from its operations to invest in itself and
produce further returns for its shareholders.
If an investor notices that the company is increasingly relying on debt to fund its growth, then it should
serve as a cautionary sign. The spiralling debt might be due to non-conversion of profits into cash, which
can be identified by the tools discussed above or due to over ambitious management, which is expanding
faster than company’s resources permit. Both the scenarios are not good for shareholders.
Therefore, increasing debt levels should always signal a 	warning to investors irrespective of the industry in
which the company operates. Investors should focus on finding low or nil debt companies as debt free
companies cannot go bankrupt.
The above-mentioned case of Amtek India Limited also represents a case of a company, which has been
increasingly relying on debt to fund its cash requirements and has 	seen its debt levels spiralling.

-- 191 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
191 |	191 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The premise of growth with sustained profitability, improving operating efficiency, conversion of profits
into cash and then using this cash 	for future growth, remains the same 	for all businesses.
There can be many other 	aspects of accessing business performance; however, I believe that if an 	investor
tracks the performance of any company on these five aspects discussed above, then she would be able to
gauge the business performance of almost all the companies. She can separate out the good performers from
poor ones and make better-informed investment decisions.
Different investors believe that companies in one industry would have different levels of ratios (say
profitability or 	D/E 	ratio) than 	companies in 	other industries 	and 	an 	investor should 	give a 	little leeway
while comparing two companies of different sectors. However, if an investor analyses the business
performance 	of 	one 	company over 	the 	past, 	then 	the 	trend 	of 	change 	in 	its 	ratios, 	when 	compared 	with
previous years, would indicate, whether the company is showing improved business performance or not.
For example, an infra 	company might have higher debt than a Pharma company. However, 	if the debt level
were increasing year on 	year without associated increase in sales and net 	worth, then it would indicate poor
business performance for both infra and Pharma companies.
Therefore, I believe that if 	an investor makes a checklist of testing the 	past performance of all 	the companies
presenting themselves 	as 	potential investment 	opportunities, on 	the 	parameters discussed 	in 	the 	chapter,
then she would be able 	to segregate good performing companies from poor ones 	and make good investment
decisions.
Let us summarize the parameters 	to provide a ready checklist:
1. 	Sales Growth: consistent sales growth (CAGR) year on year, without occasional spikes.
2. 	Stable or Improving Profitability:
 	Operating Profit Margins (OPM) and
 	Net Profitability Margins (NPM)
3. 	Stable or Improving Operating Efficiency:
 	Inventory Turnover Ratio,
 	Days of Receivables Outstanding (Receivables Days) and
 	Fixed Asset Turnover Ratio
4. 	Conversion of Profits into Cash: Cumulative CFO should be higher than 	Cumulative PAT
5. 	Using Free Cash to fund 	Future Growth: No spiralling debt levels.

-- 192 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
192 |	192 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Until now, we have learned about selecting good stocks to buy for the portfolio. We have learned that an
investor must do a 	thorough due diligence about the 	business & industry analysis and management analysis
of the company before she 	invests her money. She should refuse to invest in any 	company where she finds
red flags during her analysis.
However, buying good stocks is not sufficient in itself for 	generating long-term wealth from stock markets.
Monitoring the stocks in the portfolio is equally important. Once an investment is made, it is advised that
the investor should keep on periodically checking whether the company still fits into her standards of
operational & managerial performance. Buy & hold strategy with a blind faith is 	not advisable for investors
in stock markets.
In most of the 	countries, laws contain easily exploitable loopholes, regulations are not strictly enforceable
and corporate governance standards are not high. We keep on hearing about instances of corporate frauds
like Enron (USA) and Satyam Computers (India) etc., frequently. Such instances serve as a grim reminder
that managerial greed succeeding at the cost of shareholders is a 	real possibility in corporate world & stock
markets.
A long-term investor should focus on monitoring fundamental parameters of business, operations &
managerial performance of the companies in her portfolio. She should not consider continuous tracking of
market prices of stocks and calculating gains at the 	end of every day as monitoring of her portfolio. In fact,
many renowned investors have advised against continuous follow-up of stock prices.
Warren Buffett believes that he would be very happy is the stock market is completely shut for two years
after he has bought shares of a 	company. Continuous tracking of stock prices has the potential of inducing
emotional reactions in investors. It might lead the 	investor to deviate from her long-term 	investment strategy
and start frequent trading or timing the market, which are some of the 5 most common mistakes done by
stock market investors.
An investor should follow a well laid 	out process to monitor each of 	the stocks in her portfolio. She 	should
focus on tracking below mentioned parameters about her stocks:
 	Important news about the companies & their industries
 	Financial results of the companies
 	Shareholding changes including pledge of promoter’s shares
 	Corporate announcements about insider trading and other related matters
 	Annual report of the company
 	Credit rating of the company
These parameters change at different frequencies and therefore, an investor can have her stocks’ monitoring
exercise clearly laid 	out as Ongoing Monitoring, Quarterly Monitoring and 	Annual Monitoring:

-- 193 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
193 |	193 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
It includes tracking information about updates, 	which change without any predetermined time 	schedule. It
contains following news and corporate 	announcements about the companies and 	their industries:
An investor should follow the news related to the companies & their industries in her portfolio. This would
keep her updated with developments like any policy & regulatory changes, new investments or exits by
players, changes in raw material and finished products etc. about her companies.
Google Alerts is a 	very good tool for this purpose. 	It is particularly effective for tracking companies, which
are relatively unpopular and not covered by mainstream media. Most of the small & mid cap companies
will fall under this category.
I advise that every investor should set Google alerts for all the companies in her portfolio. She can set the
desired frequency updates as real time/once a day or week.
Every company is required to inform the stock exchange about any important event, which can influence
its share price. Such events include buying or selling of shares by its promoters, commissioning of new
manufacturing capacity, any merger or acquisition proposals, appointment or resignation of any senior
management personnel/director etc. Such announcements are available at 	the website of the 	stock exchange.
An investor should read various corporate announcements made by the company as these would keep him
aware about latest developments within and related to the 	company. Many of these announcements would
help her make additional buying or selling decisions in shares of 	the company.
It consists of studying information released by companies to its shareholders and public every quarter. It
includes financial results and shareholding patterns with pledge details of promoters’ stake.
Most of the stock exchanges require listed companies to declare their 	financial performance at least once a
quarter. Almost all companies follow March, June, September and December quarters for this purpose.
Companies declare their quarterly and year-till-date financial results within 45 days from the end of the
quarter. Such results are available on 	the websites of companies as well as 	stock exchanges.
An investor should study all the quarterly results declared by her companies. However, she should not be	
overly concerned about the subdued performance in one or 	two quarters. She should try to see 	the company
performance in 	light of the 	general economic 	scenario. However, if 	a company 	is continuously declaring
poor financial results, then investor should analyse whether she has missed something 	during her diligence

-- 194 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
194 |	194 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
before 	buying 	the 	stock. 	In 	case 	she 	finds 	out 	any 	vital 	information 	that 	changes 	her 	views 	about 	the
company then she should consider exiting the stock.
All the companies are required to declare their shareholding pattern & details of the pledge 	of promoter’s
shares once in a 	quarter. Most companies follow a similar pattern of 	declaring it in March, June, September
and December quarters. These details are 	updated on the websites of companies and stock exchanges.
The investor should study the shareholding pattern every quarter and compare it 	with the pattern of previous
quarters. This analysis will tell her whether promoters or other major shareholders are increasing or
decreasing their stake in the company. The 	investor should focus mainly on 	the changes in the promoter’s
shareholding and can ignore the changes for other shareholders.
Promoters increasing stake in their company is a 	very healthy sign as they are the 	people with most intimate
knowledge about the prospects of a company. Hence, it is said that if promoters are buying stocks of a
company, then investors should buy as well.
On the contrary, an investor should be concerned if promoters are consistently reducing their stake in the
company. She should analyse and try to find further information about it as it amounts to decreasing skin
in the game of the largest interested party. It can be that the promoters might have sold their stake to raise
funds for meeting any personal exigency. However, the investor should keep on investigating until she is
convinced that promoters are still serious about the future of 	the company.
Other major investors like institutional investors (e.g. FIIs & 	DIIs) are temporary investors who come and
go as per availability of funds with them. They do not have a significant impact on business performance
of the company until they increase their stake to strategic levels (>25% in India). Once they acquire the	
stake of >25%, they are able to influence the business decisions of the company. If a strategic investor is
present in any company, then the investor should follow the change in its shareholding as well.
Companies declare the details of the pledge 	of promoters’ shareholding every quarter along withthe
shareholding pattern. Any amount of pledge should be seen with caution, as it is one of the first signs of
stress in the financial health of the promoters & possibly the company also. If the promoter is not able to
repay her loan, then lenders holding the pledge will sell the shares in the market. It would affect the share
price 	very 	negatively 	and 	will 	reduce promoter’s 	shareholding 	in 	the 	company as 	well. Therefore, 	it 	is
advised to stay away from companies where promoters have pledged their shares 	with financial institutions.
It includes studying information about the companies, which is updated once a year. It includes reading the
annual report and credit rating reports for 	the companies.

-- 195 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
195 |	195 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The annual report is the most important document published by every company at 	the end of every financial
year. The company communicates its performance in the past year, strategy for future, expansion plans etc.
to its shareholders through an annual report. An investor can ignore reading the annual report of the
companies in her portfolio, only at her 	own peril.
Reading annual report is the most 	important part of investment analysis. Therefore, I have written a 	separate
chapter for understanding annual report of a company.
Most of the companies, which have raised debt from markets or financial institutions, are required to get
their debt facilities rated by any of 	the credit rating agencies accredited by regulators. Some of 	the prominent
credit rating agencies active in India 	are CRISIL (part of S&P), ICRA (part of Moody’s), CARE and India
Ratings (part of Fitch). These agencies review the financial position of the companies at least once a year
to update the credit ratings issued by them. 	The agencies publish the ratings on their 	websites along with a
summary document containing brief details about the comforting and constraining factors about the
company. An investor can download the summary document from 	their websites.
Such ratings are a 	useful source of tracking financial health of a 	company for investors. Any improvement
in credit rating is a positive sign and similarly, any downgrade of credit rating is a negative sign, which
should be analysed in detail by the investor.
Nowadays, 	there 	are 	many 	financial 	portals, 	which 	accumulate 	information 	about 	the 	companies 	from
various sources and present it to readers in one place. In India, financial media houses like Moneycontrol,
Economic Times etc. provide all the information about the companies like a declaration of results,
shareholding patterns, corporate announcements, and credit rating information etc. on 	their websites. It is,
therefore, advised that the investor should update her portfolio at any of these websites so that she can
access most of the 	information required for monitoring of stocks in her portfolio at one 	place.
Therefore, we can see 	that for monitoring stocks in her portfolio, an investor should do:
1. 	Ongoing Monitoring	Ongoing Monitoring: Track the news about the 	company & its industry by Google Alerts and read
corporate announcements
2. 	Quarterly Monitoring	Quarterly Monitoring: Study the financial results and shareholding pattern with pledge details of
promoters’ stake and
3. 	Annual Monitoring	Annual Monitoring: Study the annual reports and credit rating reports of the companies.
There are many additional methods, which investors use to 	monitor their investments like attending annual
general meetings (AGM), participate in analyst conference calls, visit company premises to see facilities,
visit trade shows to see new product launches etc. An investor can put the amount of time & effort available
to her for monitoring her portfolio. However, I believe that the above-mentioned process of monitoring
stocks, if followed diligently, should suffice for a common investor.

-- 196 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
196 |	196 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
It is pertinent to highlight again that a long-term investor should track the business, operational and
managerial parameter for monitoring stocks in 	her portfolio. Tracking share price changes 	daily would do
more harm than good to her.

-- 197 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
197 |	197 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
One of the key requisites of being listed on stock exchanges is that the listed companies are required to
disclose their performance on a periodic basis. This is true 	for publically listed companies across the world.
Different countries stipulate different disclosure requirements on the companies listed on their respective
stock exchanges. However, the common requirement in all the markets is to disclose information about
critical developments on an ongoing basis and financial performance on a 	regular basis.
Most of the markets, including India, stipulate disclosure of financial performance at least once every	
quarter. Therefore, companies listed on 	Indian stock exchanges publish their financial performance at least
four times in each financial year (April 	– 	March) within a prescribed timeline from the 	end of the stipulated
period (end of the quarter):
 	April to June: within 45 days from end 	of June quarter
 	July to September: within 45 days from end 	of September quarter
 	October to December: within 45 days from 	end of December quarter
 	January to March: within 60 days from the end of March quarter
If due to any reason, a company is not able to disclose its results within the above-mentioned timelines,
then it is a red flag. The investor should be warned that the company is facing some issue and she should
not ignore such delay in disclosure of results as being trivial in nature. Most of the times, delays in filing
of quarterly financial performance are 	linked with ongoing frauds and corporate governance issues within
the companies.
The example of Ricoh India Limited is pertinent here, which published its results for September 2015
quarter on May 18, 2016. The company has initiated proceedings against its senior management for the
possibility of perpetrating fraud.
The current chapter focuses on understanding the key information contained in the quarterly results
published by companies and 	their interpretations. The chapter 	is aimed at 	helping the reader to 	develop a
framework in getting the critical information from quarterly filings within a short amount of 	time.
SEBI has stipulated the minimum level of information, which a company must disclose in its quarterly
results. However, the companies are free 	to disclose any information over and above the 	minimum required.
Quarterly results of most of the 	companies in India, contain the following sections and information:
 	Independent auditor’s review report 	for the 	disclosed financials
 	Profit and loss statement
 	Statement of promoters’ shareholding and pledging levels
 	Balance sheet, mainly in September quarter (half year) and March quarter (full year)
 	Statement of investor complaints

-- 198 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
198 |	198 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
 	Notes 	disclosing 	key 	outcomes 	of 	the 	board 	meeting, 	the 	status 	of 	projects 	under 	execution,
dividend declaration and other critical developments about the 	company.
Analysis of quarterly results is a part of regular monitoring exercise of companies in one’s portfolio.
Therefore, it becomes one of the key 	events that shareholders track to update themselves about company’s
affairs.
Let’s understand in detail the key information disclosed in the quarterly result reports and their relevance
& interpretation for a fundamental stock investor.
While assessing quarterly results, one of the key parameters that every investor should track is the timing
of disclosure of results:
1) If a 	company is not able to 	publish its quarterly results within the stipulated timelines (45 or 60 	days, as
applicable), then it is a 	serious issue and the investor should definitely be worried.
In the case of 	Ricoh India Limited, the company intimated the stock exchanges on November 14, 2015, the
last date for disclosure of results for September 2015 quarter, that it would not be able to publish results
within the deadlines. Later on, the company disclosed that it is investigating the possibility of a fraud by
the senior management of the 	company.
2) On similar lines, if a company that used to publish results promptly within a few days from the end of
the quarter, delays its results, even 	then an investor should try to find out the 	reasons for such delay.

-- 199 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
199 |	199 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Many times, such delay is associated with the 	change in management of the company, which is a frequent
event for public sector undertakings (PSUs). In most of such cases, the 	new management takes the 	time to
clean up the books of the activities of the previous management so that it may start with a clean slate.
Other 	reasons 	for 	the 	delay 	in 	declaration 	of 	results 	might 	include 	that 	the 	promoter/senior
management/directors are not available due to 	certain engagements. However, the investor should analyse
each case of 	delay in filing of the results and try to find out the possible reasons 	leading to the delay.
Auditor’s report is a 	very important section of the quarterly results that contains 	the opinion of a 	competent
third party on the financial performance disclosed by the company. However, it is the section of quarterly
results that routinely gets ignored. One of the key reason for such ignorance is that in most of 	the well-run
companies, the auditor’s report is uneventful and a standard attachment to results, containing mundane
legally conscious language.
However, auditor’s report is an all important part of the results that has 	many times exposed significant
misdeeds and frauds perpetrated by the management. The role of the independent auditor is paramount in
the principal-agency relationship of shareholders and management.
We mentioned earlier that Ricoh India Limited delayed the filing of its quarterly results for September
2015. Finally, the company published these results on May 18, 2016. The auditor’s report, which formed
part 	of 	the 	results 	release, 	contained 	eye-opening 	comments 	on 	the 	status 	of 	financial 	dealings 	of 	the
company.

-- 200 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
200 |	200 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Therefore, it becomes paramount that investors should always read the auditor’s report in detail, whenever
they read the financial results of 	any company.
Profit & loss statement (P&L) is the permanent feature of all the 	quarterly results and many times investors
limit their reading of quarterly results to the P&L only. However, it is advised that investors should pay
equal attention to all the sections of the 	quarterly results to effectively monitor their stock holdings.
The P&L statement in the 	quarterly results contains:
 	the financial performance for the 3 months ending in the current quarter (e.g. 	March 2016 quarter),
 	the performance of preceding 3 months (December 2015 quarter),
 	the performance of respective quarter in the 	previous financial year (March 2015 quarter),
 	year to date (YTD) performance of the current year (6M-FY2016, 9M-FY2016 or FY2016 as the
case may be),
 	YTD performance of previous year (6M-FY2015, 9M-FY2015 or FY2015 as the case 	may be) and
 	the performance of the 	previous full financial year (FY2015 in this case).

-- 201 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
201 |	201 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
In the case of 	companies having subsidiaries, joint ventures etc. the performance at both standalone as well
as consolidated level are disclosed. Let’s see the P&L disclosed by Ambika Cotton Mills Limited in its
March 2016 quarterly results:
*Disclosure: I own shares of Ambika Cotton Mills in my 	portfolio.
There are different set of analysis inputs that an investor can get from the P&L statement contained in the
quarterly results. These analysis 	points usually include:
It compares the YTD performance of the company until the reported quarter (6 months, 9 months or full
year as the case may be) with the performance in the same period in 	the previous financial year.

-- 202 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
202 |	202 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The investor can assess the performance 	of the company on parameters like:
 	Sales growth	Sales growth: compare sales income to 	assess growth or decline in sales income
 	Profitability margins	Profitability margins: compare the 	profitability margins/proportion of expenses as a 	ratio of sales
income:
o 	operating profit margin (OPM),
o 	net profit margin (NPM),
o 	the cost of material consumed as a ratio of sales,
o 	power & fuel as a ratio of sales
o 	employee expenses
o 	finance costs etc.
All these parameters highlight the improvement or deterioration of the financial performance of the
company during the periods under comparison. The investor should especially focus on the item, which
shows sudden high increase or decrease over 	the comparative periods.
It compares the performance of the company during the reported quarter (March 2016) with the
performance in the respective quarter 	in the previous financial year (March 	2015). The key parameters of
performance evaluation are the same as has been discussed above.
The YoY performance rules out the impact of seasonality in the business of the company. It provides an
opportunity to understand the current performance of the company with the performance in the last year
under similar seasonal parameters.
It compares the performance of the company during the reported quarter (March 2016) with the
performance in the 	preceding 	quarter (December 2015). 	The key 	evaluation parameters remain 	the same as
per the above discussion.
I advise the investors to focus more on the 	year to date (YTD) performance and not get 	a lot worried about
the quarterly performances.
Even in quarterly performance evaluation, it is advised that investors should give more weight to YoY
performance 	than 	QoQ 	performance. 	As 	mentioned above 	YoY 	performance 	is 	assumed 	to 	rule 	out 	the
impact of seasonality in the business performance evaluation.
QoQ performance evaluation is of least importance among the three scenarios discussed above (YTD, YoY
and QoQ).
I believe that changing the views about 	a company after each 	quarterly results, is to fundamental investing
what intra-day trading is 	to technical investing:

-- 203 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
203 |	203 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
It is all but natural that the performance of humans, as well as companies, never stays the same over time
and we suffer from periods of exuberance and distress. It is difficult to repeat 	exactly the same performance
for humans and companies in two attempts (only machines/robots seem to be capable of doing it). In this
light, we expect the company’s performance to fluctuate from one period to another and it should be
accepted as a norm.
We should be worried if the company keeps on improving/maintaining its performance like a clockwork
performance. Because such 	performance is usually associated 	with managed 	financials where 	the company
adjusts/cooks its books to show desired 	financial performance.
The quarterly results also contain a section on the financial performance of different segments of the
companies and provide their performance data in the form of:
 	Segmental revenue
 	Intra-company/group dealings of 	different segments
 	Segmental net profits
 	Segmental capital employed, which can be used to assess the return on capital employed for a
particular segment.
As discussed above in the quarterly P&L analysis section, while doing segmental analysis as well, it is
advised that an investor should focus on the year 	to date (YTD) performance the 	most, next on the year 	on
year (YoY) performance and least on the quarter on quarter (QoQ) performance.
Most of the companies listed on stock exchanges in India disclose their summary balance sheet in their
September (half yearly) and March (full year) quarterly results. The summary balance sheet contains only
a snapshot of assets and liabilities at the date of the end of the quarter without providing detailed
notes/schedules, which are included in the annual report.

-- 204 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
204 |	204 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Even though the balance sheet 	is only a summary, nevertheless, it 	provides great insights into the status of
the company’s financial position at the reporting date. An investor can get a rough estimate ofthe change
in leverage, the progress of projects under execution, movement of cash & funds etc. from the summary
balance sheet.
I advise investors to mandatorily conduct the funds flow analysis whenever they 	analyse the balance sheet.
Movement of funds in the company’s balance sheet can be assessed by doing a comparative assessment of
different sections of the balance sheet. An investor should compare the values of every section at the
reporting date of the current year and the previous year and calculate the change in their values.
In the liabilities section, any increase in an 	item means that the company has 	received funds (inflow), which
need to be paid 	to external parties like:
 	shareholders (equity and reserves),
 	lenders (long term debt, short term debt etc.),
 	vendors (trade payables),
 	customers (advances from customers usually part of other current liabilities)
 	employees (leaves, gratuity etc. as part of 	short-term provisions)
Similarly, a decrease in any item 	in the liability section means that the funds have gone out (outflow) from
the company to third parties to satisfy the 	existing liability.
In the assets section, any increase in items means that the company has spent funds (outflow) to purchase
assets, which would generate cash/funds inflow in future like:
 	Fixed assets (purchase of plant and machinery)
 	Long 	term 	loans 	& 	advances/Non-current 	investments 	(investments 	in 	long-term 	financial
products, JVs, subsidiaries etc.)
 	Current Investments (investments in short-term financial products)
 	Inventory (raw material)
 	Trade receivables (payment due from customers)
 	Cash & equivalents (bank balance)
 	Short term loans & advances (loans to related parties, vendors etc.)
Similarly, a decrease in any item in the assets section means that the funds have come into the company
(inflow) from third parties by way of 	sale of assets or collection of 	dues from third parties.

-- 205 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
205 |	205 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
This contrasting interpretation of directional change (increase/decrease) in items in liabilities and assets
sections and their impact on funds statement (inflow/outflow) becomes confusing for many investors.
Therefore, it is essential that the 	reader spends extra care while interpreting the funds flow analysis.
To understand further, let’s do the fund-flow analysis on the summary balance sheet of Ambika Cotton
Mills Limited, which it disclosed with March 31, 	2016, results:
To simplify the matter, all the items depicting funds inflow have been shown in “Green” and all the items
leading to funds outflow are shown 	as “Red”
The fund flow analysis depicts that Ambika Cotton Mills Limited, has received funds of about 	₹75.6 crores
from:
 	reserves (net profits 	– 	dividends paid): 	₹34.8 crores
 	inventory (used in creating goods for sales): 	₹20 crores

-- 206 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
206 |	206 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
 	fixed assets (depreciation 	– 	non cash expense in P&L): 	₹14.8 crores
 	long term loans & advances (recovered 	money back, sold long financial products): 	₹7 crores
The analysis also indicates that these funds have been used by the company in the period under analysis
(March 2015 to March 	2016) in the following manner:
 	payment of long-term debt: 	₹3.7 crores
 	payment of short-term debt: 	₹26 crores
 	payment 	of 	other 	current 	liabilities 	(primarily 	current 	maturity 	of 	long-term 	debt 	and 	customer
advances that are recognized as sales and therefore 	removed from balance sheet liabilities: see the
section below): 	₹13 crores
 	payment of trade payables to the vendors: 	₹4 crores
 	providing credit to customers (trade receivables): 	₹12.5 crores
 	deposits in banks (cash and equivalents): 	₹2 crores
 	given as short-term loans and advances: 	₹2 crores
Other current liabilities section of the FY2015 annual report of 	Ambika Cotton Mills Limited, showing the
current maturity of long-term debt and 	other items in the composition of other current liabilities section:
The fund flow analysis for Ambika Cotton Mills Limited indicates that during FY2016, the primary sources
of funds for Ambika Cotton Mills have been profits (reserves) and liquidation of inventory, which it has
used to repay debt (short term, long term and current maturity of long-term debt) and providing credit to
customers.
This pattern of funds flow indicates normal operations of a healthy profitable company where the
management is using the funds generated from the 	company into company operations.
Fund flow analysis has the potential of highlighting and early stage identification of cases where
management uses funds generated from the 	company (profits/reserves and debt) for its own 	benefits in form
of loans and advances to 	group companies/promoter entities.
The case of Gujarat Automotive Gears Limited (GAGL) is a pertinent example of funds diversion by the
promoter/management, 	in 	which 	the 	majority 	shareholder/promoter/management 	took 	out 	the 	profits 	of

-- 207 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
207 |	207 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
GAGL and made it take debt, which GAGL did not need for its operations and used these funds to give
loans to themselves. Promoters of GAGL (HIM Teknoforge Limited) in turn benefited at the 	cost of GAGL
shareholders.
The analysis would also 	indicate:
 	whether the debt position of the company is improving or 	deteriorating by observing increasing or
decreasing debt levels
 	whether the receivables position of the company is changing for 	better or worse by noticing increase
or decrease in trade 	receivables when compared with sales performance
 	Status of project progress:
 	In case capital work in progress (CWIP) is 	increasing, it would mean that the work on 	project under
implementation is progressing
 	In case CWIP has decreased and net fixed assets (NFA) has increased, it would mean that most
probably the under construction project has been completed and has been 	transferred from CWIP
to NFA
Thus an investor can get multiple useful information points from the cursory overview of summary balance
sheet disclosed with quarterly results.
Quarterly results published by the companies usually contain a 	short section of notes, which contains a 	few
bullet points indicating:
 	the key outcomes of the board 	meeting
 	declaration of dividend, if any
 	status of progress of projects under implementation
 	other critical developments related to the company
 	other disclosures
These notes are a critical piece of 	communication from the company to its shareholders and serve as a direct
source of assessment of critical issues affecting the company and 	shareholders.

-- 208 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
208 |	208 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
An investor should also read the notes in the quarterly results filed by Ricoh India Limited for September
2015 quarter disclosed on May 18, 2016, which can be downloaded from here. These notes are an eye
opener for every investor.
This section contains critical information about changing promoters’ shareholding and the level of the
pledge that they have created if any:
 	The increase 	in promoters’ shareholding is seen as a positive indicator that shows faith of promoters
in the company and vice versa.
 	The increase in the pledge of shareholding by promoters is seen as a negative indicator as it
indicates the deteriorating financial position of the promoters. It also indicates that the promoters
are reducing their interest in the company in an indirect manner by monetizing their shareholding
by taking loans against it.
 	The decrease in pledge along with a decrease in promoter shareholding is the worst sign as it
indicates that the promoter is not able to repay the debt raised against the shares and the lenders
have invoked the pledge. It means 	that the lenders have sold the 	shares and used the money to 	settle
their debt.
 	Decrease in pledge with stable or increasing shareholding is seen as 	a positive sign, as it indicates
improving liquidity position of the promoters and 	their interest in the 	business/company.

-- 209 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
209 |	209 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
However, this segment of the quarterly results disclosure is a duplication of information, which the
companies have already declared as part of shareholding pattern disclosures. Shareholding pattern
disclosures are to be done by companies within 21 days from the end of the quarter whereas the quarterly
results are to be 	disclosed within 45-60 days after the end of 	the quarter.
Therefore, if an investor has been following the company closely and has already analysed the shareholding
pattern filing 	previously, 	then 	she may ignore this 	section. 	Otherwise, 	she may get critical 	information 	about
promoters’ liquidity position and their interest in the 	company.
With this, we have come to an end to the current chapter, which focuses on the importance of analysing
quarterly results disclosures of a company. To summarize, an investor should focus on the following key
aspects while studying the quarterly 	results:
1. 	Timing of results disclosure: delay in results disclosure should not be taken lightly
2. 	Independent auditor’s review report: should be read for all the key comments
3. 	Profit & loss account: focus more on the year to date (YTD) performance, next on the year on year
(YoY) performance and least on the quarter 	on quarter (QoQ) performance
4. 	Balance sheet: mandatorily do the funds flow analysis
5. 	Shareholding pattern: analyse the change in promoters’ shareholding and pledge levels
6. 	Notes to the 	results: read 	all the points in the notes carefully to understand developments related to
key aspects of company’s developments.

-- 210 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
210 |	210 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
One of the common questions that every stock investor faces is “How many stocks she should own in her
portfolio?” How many stocks 	are too few and how 	many stocks become too many? Too few stocks expose
the investor to high risk 	that under-performance by a 	single stock would significantly bring down the value
of the entire portfolio. Too many stocks would spread the portfolio very thin and stellar performance by
any stock would have only minimal impact on 	the overall portfolio.
Many investors follow different approaches for it. Some investors believe in linking the number of stocks
to the size of the 	portfolio. Others link it to the number of investment opportunities available. Still, others
link it to the age of the investor. There is no consensus on any way of determining the ideal number of
stocks in a portfolio.
This chapter aims to help the investor through this riddle and arrive at the ideal number of stocks in her
portfolio.
It is well known that increasing the number of stocks in the portfolio increases the diversification, which
effectively reduces the risk in the portfolio. Diversification means that different stocks of the portfolio
respond to different factors and all of 	the stocks do not go down in value at 	the same time; thereby reducing
the probability of severe losses during bear phases. However, there are certain established rules of
diversification, which act as guidelines to solve the puzzle of 	an ideal number of 	stocks in the portfolio:
Two stocks from different industries are the minimum number of stocks that any investor should have in
her portfolio, to get any diversification benefit to reduce risk.
It is believed that more the number of stocks in the portfolio, the higher is the diversification benefit or
lower is the risk. However, the rules of diversification limit further benefit after reaching a certain number
of stocks in the portfolio, which becomes the 	maximum number of stocks in the 	portfolio.
Different researchers have proved that the additional diversification benefit, which increases with the
addition of a new stock in 	the portfolio, becomes minimal after 20-30 stocks.

-- 211 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
211 |	211 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The above graph from Financial Analysts Journal indicates that if an investor adds more stocks in the
portfolio beyond 30 stocks, it would not reduce any further risk in the 	portfolio. On the contrary, it would
make the portfolio unnecessarily large and the good performance of any one stock would not be able to
produce a 	meaningful 	impact on 	the total 	portfolio 	performance. 	Therefore, increasing the 	number of 	stocks
beyond 30 might prove counterproductive for the investor.
It is, therefore, recommended that an investor should keep the number of stocks in her 	portfolio within these
two boundaries of 2 and 	30.
However, another very important factor limits the number 	of stocks an investor should have in her portfolio:
Every stock in the portfolio requires regular monitoring by the investor. It is a mix of continuous
monitoring, quarterly monitoring and annual monitoring, as detailed in 	the chapter on monitoring the 	stocks
in the portfolio.
Reading the chapter on monitoring would help an 	investor develop her monitoring framework and estimate
the amount of effort it would take to monitor each stock in her portfolio. Monitoring every stock would
entail detailed reading of at least 	four quarterly statements and one annual report 	every year, in addition to
regular reading to news and updates about the 	company (e.g. Google alerts).
The investor should have only as many stocks that she can monitor effectively given the time & effort,
which she can spare for her portfolio. Inability to monitor and staying updated about her stocks regularly
might present her with surprise developments related to her portfolio stocks and increase the 	risk.

-- 212 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
212 |	212 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The above guidelines suggest that an investor should try to 	own as few stocks between 2 	and 30, as possible.
Having a minimum possible number of stocks, if monitored effectively, would provide a healthy mix of
diversification benefit without spreading the portfolio too thin and without putting a huge demand on
investor’s time.
The legendary investor, Warren Buffett also believes in having a minimum number of stocks in the
portfolio. He advised 	an investor 	to have 	concentrated holdings in his 	1978 letter to 	Berkshire Hathaway
shareholders:
“Our policy is to concentrate holdings. We try to avoid buying a little of this or that
when we are only lukewarm about the business or its price. When we are convinced as
to attractiveness, we believe in buying worthwhile amounts.”
Additionally, during times of crisis/recessions, diversification seems to have failed to provide any real
benefit. Investors would remember 	that during 	the market 	decline of 	2008, almost all 	the stocks 	irrespective
of the industry they belonged to, fell in 	tandem. This hard lesson was learnt earlier 	in 1998, during Russia,
Brazil and East Asia Crisis, when a prominent hedge fund, Long Term Capital Management, witnessed its
more than 6,500 investments making losses simultaneously. The fund had to be 	bailed out by others.
Therefore, the attempt of an investor should be to own the minimum possible number of stocks, as 	per her
convenience, comfort and availability of spare time.
I suggest the investor diversify the portfolio as much that she should not lose her peace of mind by being
overly concerned about it. If owning 100 stocks makes her feel comfortable, then she should have it.
However, this chapter is 	aimed at conveying the message that 	the diversification benefit of 30 or 	100 stocks	is almost the same. On the contrary, a larger number of stocks would hurt portfolio performance, as any
good performing stock would be able to 	have only a small impact 	on the overall portfolio returns.
An investor should take following steps to build the personalized portfolio ideal for an investor:
It is assumed that the investor has bought her existing stocks after doing detailed research and has 	monitored
the performance of these companies over the years. Therefore, she knows these stocks more than other
stocks in the market. If any of the stocks in the portfolio provides good investment opportunity, then the
investor should prefer investing in it rather than searching for a new stock every time she has surplus money.
However, if an investor realizes that she has bought her stocks based on recommendations of others and
has not done her 	own research, then she should scrutinize her 	portfolio stocks on the steps mentioned in the
chapters in this book to decide 	whether her portfolio stocks pass the test of 	being investment worthy.

-- 213 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
213 |	213 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
An investor should sell the stocks, 	which are showing deteriorating operating performance for at 	least two
consecutive years. Selling these stocks would purge the portfolio of undesired stocks and lead to a neat &
clean portfolio with fundamentally good stocks.
When the investor realizes that all the stocks in her 	portfolio are fundamentally sound and have crossed the
threshold of putting additional money, then she should start the search of finding a new stock to be added
to her portfolio. She should always keep in mind that addition of every new stock is going to add to the
time & effort required to monitor the portfolio effectively. Therefore, she should always try to keep the
number of stocks in the 	portfolio to the minimum possible.
The ideal number of stocks in the portfolio would vary from one investor to another. We can see that the
major factors, which would determine the number of 	stocks, are:
1. 	The number of stocks should be between 2 to 	30. Portfolios having any number of stocks more than
30, do not offer 	any additional benefit in terms of risk reduction than the 	portfolio with 30 stocks.
2. 	The number of stocks would depend on the time & effort the investor can spend on effectively
monitoring the stocks in the portfolio. A full-time investor can afford to have more stocks in her
portfolio than the investor having another full-time day job.
3. 	An experienced investor can afford to have more stocks in her portfolio as she can monitor her
stocks effectively by spending less time than a new investor. It is assumed that a new investor
would need more time 	to understand the quarterly & 	annual reports and thus might not 	effectively
monitor a large portfolio until she gains the required expertise.
Once the new investor feels comfortable with her monitoring framework, then she can enlarge her 	portfolio
without diluting the monitoring quality.
The argument above might go against the common perception that new investors should have a large
portfolio, 	as 	they 	might 	err while selecting 	portfolio 	stocks 	and a 	large portfolio 	would 	minimize 	the impacts
of their errors. Followers of this argument believe that a large portfolio would have a greater chance of
hitting a jackpot. However, I do not recommend that a new investor should have a large portfolio of 	stocks.
A new investor should spend more & more time honing her skills of stock selection and monitoring.
Therefore, she should focus on a few 	stocks at a time. If 	she has more surplus money, then she should invest
it in equity mutual funds temporarily, which would shield her portfolio from her stock selection mistakes
in the initial phase. Once she believes that she has 	learned the art of stock selection & monitoring, and then	
she can shift her 	savings from mutual funds to her carefully selected stocks.

-- 214 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
214 |	214 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Therefore, new investors should try to keep their portfolio size small so that they can focus more on the
learning aspect of stock investing and learn the higher levels 	of this skill.
Therefore, we can see 	that it is good for any investor to have the minimum number of stocks between 2 	to
30 in her portfolio. The number of 	stocks in the portfolio is a fine balance between the peace 	of mind from
a sudden decrease in portfolio value due to any stock doing poor and the time & effort needed to monitor
the portfolio effectively.
Therefore, the ideal number of stocks in the portfolio is an outcome of the investor’s risk appetite, her
investing expertise and the time availability with her.

-- 215 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
215 |	215 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Recently, I read a post 	about “How Not to 	Invest” on Stocktwits.com. The post 	showed a chart highlighting
the mistakes, which an investor can make if she does not have the discipline and a plan of action
The chart shows an investor getting attracted towards a 	stock whose price is 	rising (1). She buys the 	stock
once she is convinced that price rise is continuing (4). However, apparently, she has not done the
fundamental analysis of the stock. The bear 	market hits the stock and its price 	starts falling. The investor is
caught unaware holding the stock bought near the top. She is happy initially and increases her position in
the stock (6). However, she panics once she realizes that the 	price is not rebounding and sells at a huge loss
(12). Nevertheless, by the time she sells, the market bottoms out and the price starts to rise again (15-17).
As the investor is once bitten twice shy, she does not buy when the stock price is low but soon realizes that
she has missed the bus (19).
The chart depicts the story of an investor who has 	not invested time in learning stocks analysis. She follows
the crowd and takes buy/sell decisions based on emotions of fear and greed. However, if she had spent
some time learning fundamental stocks analysis, then she would have avoided the detrimental “Buy Hig	h
and Sell Low” cycle in which many individual investors get stuck.
An investor should read books of 	renowned investors and develop a 	stock picking approach suitable to her.
She should make her stock picking criteria and do valuation analysis before buying a stock. Once she
develops the habit of analyzing each stock in detail before she invests her hard-earned money, she would

-- 216 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
216 |	216 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
be confident 	about her 	decision of buying 	any stock. 	The hard 	work and 	time invested in the 	analysis would
help her maintain a stable 	view towards her stocks. She would not fall prey to 	emotions of fear & 	greed and
would be able to think like a 	business owner and focus on long-term wealth creation.
In the past, I had 	been trying to chase market trends by following technical analysis. I tried to buy and sell
stocks with each price rise and fall. 	However, I realized that it was 	a futile attempt, as it was 	not generating
expected profits for me. It 	made me read 	more about different investing styles. While reading The Intelligent
Investor by Benjamin Graham, I learned about fundamental analysis and I started the following value
investing. Since that day, my 	investing habits have changed altogether and my trading charts turned exactly
opposite to the chart shown above.
For example, I bought JK Lakshmi Cement Ltd. (JK Lakshmi) in August 2008 at 	₹ 	80 and saw its share
price decline 	to 	₹32 at the peak of 	the global crisis. However, Benjamin Graham in The 	Intelligent Investor
had taught me that stock declines are temporary and good stocks always recover. I did not panic and kept
my emotions in control. I was convinced about the good fundamentals of JK Lakshmi and used the low
prices to increase my investment in JK Lakshmi. I was rewarded handsomely (annualized return of 115%)
when markets recovered later, as they have always done after each recession in the past.

-- 217 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
217 |	217 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Similarly, I bought Allahabad Bank in June 2008 at 	₹70 and witnessed its price declining to 	₹37 post-
Lehman crisis. I held on to my nerves and bought more to take benefit of low prices. Benjamin Graham had
taught me that an investor should buy stocks like groceries. Thus, an investor should buy more when stocks
are on sale like in bear markets. I followed Graham’s advice diligently and benefited from it when prices
started rising from March 2009. I could get an 	annualized return of 102% from my investments in Allahabad
Bank.
I had to sell JK Lakshmi and Allahabad Bank in Nov-Dec 2009, as I needed money for some purpose.
A reader might think that it was due to pure luck that the market revived in March 2009 and I could make
profits 	from JK 	Lakshmi 	and Allahabad Bank. However, the 	following 	chart from 	the book 	“The 5 Mistakes
Every Investor Makes” shows that recessions always lead to recovery.

-- 218 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
218 |	218 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The assurance of recovery from recessions helped me again in 2012-2014 for my investments in Haldyn
Glass Ltd (Haldyn). I started investing in Haldyn in December 2012 at 	₹16.5. However, the stock price
plunged by about 40% to 	₹10.3 in July 2013. I 	used this God sent opportunity to invest heavily in 	Haldyn.
I could get good profits 	when markets recovered in 	April 2014. My investments in Haldyn Glass provided
me annualized return of 70%.

-- 219 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
219 |	219 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
I decided to sell Haldyn after Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) decided to cut the
supply of natural gas to many companies including Haldyn Glass Ltd. Haldyn cut its production capacity
by 20% after 	the Petroleum ministry did not 	provide any respite. I sold 	Haldyn as the regulatory decision
has altered its business dynamics for worse.
A reader might wonder: does the V 	or U shape is the only chart 	pattern, which the trading diary of a value
investor reflects. The answer is No! JK Lakshmi, Allahabad Bank and Haldyn Glass are some of 	the stocks
where the stock price fell after I made the investment. It does not happen for all the stocks. Let us see the
case of investment in Mayur Uniquoters Ltd (Mayur).
I invested in Mayur Uniquoters Ltd in January 2012 at 	₹41 (split & bonus adjusted). The stock was a very
attractive buy at that price. Thereafter, it caught the eye of the market very soon. Many brokerage houses
started researching it and published reports recommending it to their clients. Private equity funds and
mutual funds invested in the company and its price kept on going up. I still hold Mayur in my portfolio
despite significant gains, as its business prospects are still very attractive.

-- 220 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
220 |	220 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
If we compare the first chart published by Stocktwits with the charts of JK Lakshmi, Allahabad Bank,
Haldyn Glass & Mayur Uniquoters, then we can 	learn about quite a 	few critical habits which fundamental
value investing teaches an 	investor:
 	An investor should conduct fundamental stock analysis before investing in any stock
 	Once the investor buys a 	stock after due diligence, she 	should think of long-term association with
the company and not panic if its stock price falls. We can see that JK Lakshmi fell by 60%,
Allahabad Bank by 50% and Haldyn Glass by 40% before their share prices recovered. After
investing in a company, the investor should ignore market fluctuations and instead focus on the
business performance of the companies to monitor her 	portfolio.
 	The investor should use the 	buying opportunity presented by recessions to increase 	her investments
in good stocks.
 	All recessions always lead to recovery.
 	The investor should not sell a good company even if its stock price remains stagnant for
considerable time e.g. share price of Mayur Uniquoters remained within the range of 100-120 for
almost a year (Sept 2012 - 	Sept 2013). Mayur’s price increased to more than400% in next 10
months to 	₹470 in July 2014.
 	The market always goes up in spurts, which can never be predicted. E.g. JK Lakshmi (May-June
2009), Allahabad Bank (May 2009 and Sept 2009) and Haldyn Glass (May 2014 and Sept 2014).

-- 221 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
221 |	221 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Therefore, we should buy and hold good stocks and not try to get in & out of at every price 	rise or
fall. We may not be 	able to get the opportunity to enter again once we sell, 	as the market might run
away from us.
 	The investor should trade as less as 	possible. It saves on brokerage costs and 	gives peace of mind.
I believe that if 	an investor tries to develop the above-mentioned habits taught by 	Benjamin Graham, then
she can get out of the “Buy High & Sell Low” cycle and generate significant wealth in the long term.

-- 222 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
222 |	222 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
For making wealth in stock markets, knowing when to sell a stock is equally important as knowing when
to buy a stock. The 	investor should not end up selling those stocks early, which go on to make millions for
their shareholders. At the same time, the investor should not keep on holding a stock even when it shows
the signs of deteriorating business situation. Therefore, deciding when to sell a stock becomes a trickier
decision than buying it.
Until now, we have covered the steps 	to identify fundamentally good stocks for buying in the portfolio, in
detail in this book. The current 	chapter aims to help the investor in 	taking the sell decision about a stock.
I believe that an investor should invest in stocks with a long-term perspective. The targeted time horizon
should not be in months or years 	but in decades. Legendary investor, Warren Buffett also advised the same
to investors in his 2014 letter:
“Since I know of no way to reliably predict market movements, I recommend that you
purchase Berkshire shares only if you expect to hold 	them for at least five years. Those
who seek short-term profits should look elsewhere.”
“For the great majority of investors, however, who can –and should 	– 	invest with a
multi-decade horizon, 	quotational 	declines are unimportant.”
Holding a stock for decades is essential; however, the investor needs to make sure that 	she is holding only
good stocks for these decades. Therefore, monitoring the stocks in the portfolio and taking the 	sell decision
at the appropriate time becomes essential. Otherwise, the investor would find her limited capital stuck in
suboptimal businesses, which exposes her to opportunity cost. Opportunity cost means that instead of
keeping money in poorly performing companies; she could have invested her money in stocks of good	
performing companies and earned higher returns.
While interacting with many investors, I have come across many common approaches, which different
investors follow to decide about selling a stock in their portfolio. Many of these approaches are based on
the profit criteria.
 	Sell when a stock doubles or 	goes up X% from the 	buying price
 	Whenever a stock investment turns into profit, keep a trailing stop-loss so that an investor does not
forgo the profits already accrued.
 	Whenever a stock investment turns into profits, then sell stocks equal to the initial investment. It
will ensure that remaining stocks are at zero cost to the 	investor and she can hold them despite steep
fall in stock prices in future.
These approaches lead the investor to think about booking profits the moment the stock price rises above
her buying price. These approaches invariably lead to one outcome: the investor gets out of her profitable
stock investments early and fails to capitalize on the true wealth building opportunities in stock markets.
Therefore, the investor should avoid these approaches of taking ‘sell decision’ based on profit criteria.

-- 223 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
223 |	223 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We know that stock investments have the 	potential of increasing multiple of times in value, 	also known as
Multibaggers. Many investors have seen their stocks turn five-ten-or even hundred-baggers. However,
many other investors end up selling their stock investments early and miss out on the wealth creation. These
investors do not want to miss the 	unrealized profits, however small such profits are.
It highlights the need for 	the essential qualities of stock market 	investors: 	patience and emotional control	patience and emotional control.
An investor should always remember that for any stock to be a hundred-bagger, it would pass through
stages of two-bagger, ten-bagger and fifty-bagger. If an investor is not able to control her emotions and
hold on to stocks on this journey, she 	would always end up getting suboptimal returns in stock markets.
This brings us to the cardinal rule 	of investing in stock markets: 	Never sell your good stocks.	Never sell your good stocks.
However, at the same 	time, the investor should avoid being stuck in laggards. Therefore, the 	investor should
actively monitor her portfolio.
She should identify the signs of weakness in portfolio companies and update her views on the stocks
accordingly. This would help her in the 	decision about selling the stocks.
When to Sell a Stock	When to Sell a Stock
I believe that the sell decision should never be based on the stock price, let it be the current market price of
the stock or the buying price of the investor. The sell decision should always be dissociated from its price
and seen in the light 	of business characteristics of underlying companies. I believe that the following criteria
are a good guide 	for taking the sell decision:
An investor should monitor the operating performance of the 	company at the annual interval. The investor
should take note of signs of business weakness like:
An investor should analyse the portfolio companies whose sales witness decline year on 	year. At least two
consecutive years of declining sales are 	essential before the investor makes any conclusive decision about
sales decline. The investor should not become worried looking at changing trends in the quarterly sales
performance.
An investor should monitor both operating and net profit margins. She should become cautious if the
profitability margins are decreasing year on year.

-- 224 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
224 |	224 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Declining fixed asset turnover ratio, declining inventory turnover ratio and increasing receivables days: it
indicates that the management is not able 	to use assets of the 	company efficiently and that profits are being
stuck in working capital.
These are the signs of developing weaknesses in the business model of the company. If after analysis, the
investor concludes that the business advantage of the company has deteriorated, then she should sell it
without thinking about existing profit/loss made on the 	investment.
However, it is essential that investor should notice deteriorating trend of annual values in these parameters
for at least two consecutive years before getting worried about them. It is advised that investor should not
become worried by fluctuating 	quarterly performances.
In any business, short-term variations in performance are bound to happen and if the investor does not
ignore them, then she might end 	up selling some great investment at the most inopportune time. Such 	times
of temporary suboptimal performance are the best 	times to increase investments in stocks.
A business should be able to earn the maximum return on its assets, which it can while facing the
competitive pressures. An investor should be wary of investing in companies where the 	government decides
the pricing of products or puts a cap on the profitability of the companies. However, if the investor finds
that any company in 	her portfolio, which was earlier not 	exposed to such government regulation, has now
come under such rules, then 	she should consider selling the stocks of this company.
Gujarat State Petronet Limited and Indraprastha Gas Limited faced such a situation in 2012, when the
regulator, Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, restricted their profitability.
Most of the times 	regulated profitability environment leads 	to suboptimal returns for investors. Therefore,
she should sell such stocks irrespective of her investment being in 	profit or loss.
An investor should keep on updating herself about the developments affecting her portfolio stocks. In case
she comes across any adverse development, which can affect her companies, then she should analyse
whether the resultant impact would be temporary. If she concludes that the impact of such adverse
development would be long lasting and the company would not be able to recover, then she should sell her
investments in such company. Such sell decisions should not be based on current market price or existing
profit/loss on her investment.

-- 225 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
225 |	225 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
A small cap glass manufacturer Haldyn Glass Limited faced such a situation in Sept-Oct 2014 when
Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) decided to cut the supply of natural gas to many
companies in Gujarat including Haldyn Glass 	Limited.
The lobby fighting against the gas cut, South Gujarat Small Gas Consumers Association, does not bear 	very
high influence. It could not affect the decision of 	gas supply cut. It resulted in plant shutdowns by most of
the affected players. Haldyn had to 	cut its production capacity by 20%.
As mentioned above, it is essential that an investor monitor stocks in her portfolio for related development.
However, the monitoring exercise containing of ongoing monitoring, quarterly monitoring and annual
monitoring might become time-consuming, if an investor has too many stocks in her portfolio. Therefore,
if an investor notices that it is becoming cumbersome for her to effectively monitor all the stocks in her
portfolio, then 	she 	should identify 	and 	sell 	weak 	stocks from 	her 	portfolio. Such 	selling should 	be 	done
without considering current price or unrealized profits/losses in the weak stocks.
This would ensure that the investor has a 	manageable portfolio of good stocks, which would have a higher
probability of creating 	wealth over the long term.
Many times, the investor invests in a company, whose stock price starts rising fast and soon enough, its
price crosses the levels where the investor does not feel comfortable putting additional money in it.
Such instances lead to situations where the company has been 	performing very well and its stock price has
multiplied many times. However, because of no additional investment, soon, the stock becomes a very
small portion of the overall portfolio. In such situations, even huge returns in this stock would have only
modest impact on the overall portfolio. However, the presence of this stock in portfolio adds to the
monitoring burden on the investor.
I believe that in such scenarios, the investor should pray that the stock price of this company falls to
attractive levels so that she can put additional investments in it to make it a reasonable portion of her
portfolio. Otherwise, the investor should consider selling this stock, as the 	cost-benefit ratio of the 	efforts
put to monitor a small investment might not justify the return that might accrue from it.
This concludes the current chapter in which we discussed the various factors, which should help the investor
take ‘sell decision’ about her stocks.

-- 226 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
226 |	226 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Selling decision is as important as buying good stocks. It is crucial as selling a good stock early would lead
to the investor missing the wealth creation despite investing in good opportunities. Moreover, holding on
to poor companies would lead 	to capital losses as well 	as the opportunity cost of not 	investing in other good
companies.
In this chapter, we learned that the sell decision should not be based on the gains or losses, which the
investor has made from the stock. Sell decision should instead be based on the parameters like operating
performance, changing regulatory & business environment and portfolio composition.
Factors affecting the sell decision are very 	abstract and subjective. It is very likely that the 	investor would
find that the stock sold by her have risen in price after she sold them. However, the investor should note
that short-term stock movements are not always related to stock fundamentals. It is pertinent to quote
Warren Buffett here, from 	his 2014 letter to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders:
“For those investors who plan to sell within a year or two after their purchase, I can
offer no assurances, whatever the entry price. Movements of the general stock market
during such abbreviated periods will likely be far more important in determining your
results than the concomitant change in the intrinsic value of your Berkshire shares. As
Ben Graham said many decades ago: “In theshort-term, the market is a voting machine;
in the long-run, 	it acts as a weighing machine.” Occasionally, the voting decisions of
investors 	– 	amateurs and professionals alike 	– 	border on 	lunacy”
It is therefore 	suggested that the investor should ignore short-term price movements and 	keep on taking her
investment decisions based on fundamentals.

-- 227 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
227 |	227 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Equity markets are one of the key avenues for investors to create wealth for themselves. However, despite
the significant return generating potential of equity markets in 	India, the participation of retail investors in
direct equity markets remains very low.
Many times, the factors assigned to low participation of retail investors in equity markets focus on the
characteristics of markets like share price 	volatility, poor corporate governance, stock price 	manipulations,
corporate frauds etc. These issues make it 	essential that a retail investor spend sufficient time while making
her equity investment decisions.
It is advised that an investor should select any stock for investment only after doing her own assessment,
which is sufficient to provide her with 	the conviction about her investment decision. Investor’s own
research & conclusions independent of general market opinion & sentiment are key essential for an investor
to overcome the above-mentioned issues.
However, retail investors, which many times have a full-time day job to meet their financial needs, face
peculiar problems 	while conducting stock research 	and monitoring 	of the stocks in their portfolio. Let's see
what are the key issued faced by retail investors everywhere and what are the guidelines by which retail
investors can overcome their 	limitations.
Most of the retail investors have jobs, which consume most of the time of the day available to them. With
increasing time of commutation to the 	office, especially in large cities, a 	retail investor finds that her almost
entire day (7 AM to 9 PM) is 	consumed in daily office rituals.
During weekdays, retail investors hardly get time 	to effectively monitor companies in their 	portfolio. Retail
investors are not able to spare time to study the quarterly results/annual reports/company filings during
working weekdays whereas these activities are essential for monitoring of the performance of the
companies in the investor’s portfolio.
Most of the time, during the working weekdays, a retail investor is only able to track the price movement
of her portfolio due to 	wide penetration of smartphone apps and mobile internet 	availability. However, only
tracking of share prices is 	not sufficient for effective monitoring of portfolio performance.

-- 228 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
228 |	228 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The only time when a retail investor has some time at her disposal when she can analyse companies, read
their annual reports, quarterly results filings, exchange disclosures etc. is on weekends. However, it is the
same time, which she and her family expect to spend with each other after 5-6 days of the exhausting
working week.
The weekend is the only time available 	to the retail investor & her 	family for recreational, entertainment &
bonding activities. Therefore, the 	retail investor finds it 	difficult to devote time 	to her 	equity investments
on the weekends as well.
Therefore, it would be evident to the retail investor that the key issue faced by her 	is a lack of time. 	All her
equity investing strategies should be centred on this key parameter so that she is able to devote sufficient
time to her family, equity portfolio as 	well as other commitments.
However, it should not be assumed that a retail investor is at a disadvantage to full time/institutional
investors. There are quite a few aspects, in 	which a retail investor despite her time consuming day-time job,
is at an advantage when compared to the full time and 	institutional investors. Let’s see:
A retail investor does not have to depend upon her earnings from equity portfolio to meet her day to day
expenses like rent, EMI, children school fee, 	kitchen expenses etc. Her salary from the 	day time job is most
of the times sufficient for these expenses. She 	does not need to get under stress if 	a company in her portfolio
does not declare a dividend in any quarter. Whereas a full-time investor might face a cash shortfall in
meeting her household expenses, if her portfolio earnings are not 	as per expectations.
A retail investor, if she manages her household expenses well, is able to 	save some surplus funds at the end
of every month from her salary. This surplus or savings provide her regular source of funds, which she can
invest in her equity portfolio. The fact that these funds are not dependent upon the performance of equity
markets, empowers the retail investor to have the discipline of investing regularly irrespective of market
performance. 	She 	can 	easily 	invest 	this 	additional 	money 	in 	new 	opportunities, 	without 	unnecessary
churning in her equity portfolio.
A full-time investor, whose only source of income is from equity markets, does not enjoy this benefit of a
regular source of funds every 	month for deployment in her equity portfolio. A 	full-time investor might have

-- 229 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
229 |	229 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
to churn her portfolio i.e. sell existing stocks to generate funds, in case she finds an attractive opportunity
in the equity markets. This portfolio churning might or might not prove to be a successful decision every
time.
A retail investor does not have to prove her portfolio performance to anyone. She is not being judged by
markets/third parties based on the performance of her equity portfolio. As a result, a retail investor can
afford to stay calm and behave in a peaceful manner irrespective of equity market results. She can easily
focus her aim at the long-term performance of the 	companies in her portfolio as she is not being questioned
about her portfolio on a regular basis.
An institutional investor does not enjoy such freedom. The fund management team is continuously under
scrutiny for the performance of the funds that are under their management. Most of the institutional
investors, mutual funds (MF), private equity (PE) funds etc. have to disclose their performance to their
investors regularly (daily for MFs, quarterly for PE etc.). 	The fund manager is continuously under pressure
to showcase good performance whenever she sends out the periodic performance report to the investors.
Even otherwise, large investors of the funds keep on calling/enquiring the fund managers about the
performance of their money.
Such continuous monitoring of performance, many times, leads to short-term defensive investment
approach by fund managers, which is 	focused on avoiding tough questions from investors.
As mentioned above, a retail investor is not answerable to anyone for her investment decisions. She can
take her portfolio decisions without the need of such decisions looking justifiable to others. This ability
gives an immense power to the retail investor to benefit from bear markets when she can add on to her
favourite stocks, which are available at cheap prices. She can keep on buying stocks despite a continuous
decline in stock prices.
An institutional investor does not have this unrestricted freedom. As mentioned above, all her decisions
have to be approved by a board of trustees and have to be justified to large investors. In such a situation,
institutional fund managers, most of the times avoid buying stocks when prices are falling as the fund
manager might have to face tough questions on the underperformance of the fund if the stock price of her
newly bought companies does not recover soon enough.

-- 230 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
230 |	230 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
A retail investor does not have an obligation to invest her surplus funds in the equity markets as and when
she get the salary. The retail investor can hold back the buying decision and sit on cash until she believes
that the stock prices are 	available at attractive levels.
Many institutional investors like mutual funds, do not have such freedom. Mutual funds have to invest a
certain portion of their funds in 	equities, which is determined by their fund 	guidelines/prospectus. E.g. if a
mutual fund has the mandate 	of investing 90-100% of its funds in equities, then it 	has to keep at 	least 90%
of funds invested in equities all the time 	irrespective of valuation levels of stocks in the 	markets.
Such mandated guidelines create hard times for mutual fund managers, who face fund movements at
precisely the 	wrong times. 	Most 	of 	the 	mutual funds 	see 	higher investment 	by investors 	in 	bull markets
when stock prices are rising. As a 	result, to maintain the minimum equity investment proportion, the mutual
fund manager has to invest the 	fresh funds in stocks despite high valuations.
On the contrary, many a 	times investors withdraw their funds from mutual funds in bear 	markets. The fund
manager to meet the fund 	requirement of redemptions has to sell the stocks when the stock prices are falling.
As a result, the mutual fund managers end up buying stocks in rising markets and selling stocks in falling
markets. This is buying high and 	selling low, which is against the key principle 	of equity investment, which
says that investors should buy low and sell high.
A retail investor is spared this forced 	buy high and sell low situation faced by 	mutual funds, as she 	does not
have any obligation to invest funds available to her as she does 	not have a mandated equity allocation to be
followed all the time irrespective of market 	valuation levels.
Until now, we could observe that a retail investor enjoys a lot of advantages over institutional investors
when it comes to equity investing. The only issue which puts her 	on the back foot is the 	paucity of time at
her disposal to analyse & monitor 	stocks.
Therefore, if a retail investor is able to find a solution to the problem of lack of time, then she has all the
abilities to perform well in equity markets and 	even match/outperform her institutional peers.
We believe that with careful planning, a retail investor can solve her problem of shortage of time to devote
to her equity investments. If she takes care of some key guidelines while creating her portfolio, then she
would be able to manage her equity investments within the time at her disposal and also devote sufficient
time to her family and 	other commitments.
Let’s see the key guidelines that a 	retail investor should follow while investing in stock markets and while
creating her portfolio:
Always invest in companies that won’t	Always invest in companies that won’t 	require intense/close tracking	require intense/close tracking
A retail investor should try to invest in companies and create a portfolio, which does not require much
tracking/monitoring. She 	can achieve this 	objective by following two key principles:

-- 231 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
231 |	231 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
A retail investor should invest only in those companies, which enjoy a 	high margin of safety.
The previous article on the margin of safety: 	“3 Simple Ways to Assess "Margin of Safety": The	“3 Simple Ways to Assess "Margin of Safety": The
Cornerstone of Stock Investing”	Cornerstone of Stock Investing” 	explain in detail that the companies and their stocks have two sources
of the margin of safety (MoS):
It is determined by the earnings yield of the stock. The higher the earnings yield than the ongoing
treasury/G-Sec yield, the higher the margin of 	safety.
 	Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR):	Self-Sustainable Growth Rate (SSGR): 	Higher the SSGR than its achieved sales growth rate,
higher the margin of safety. Read more about SSGR in the following article: Self Sustainable
Growth Rate: a measure of 	Inherent Growth Potential of a Company
 	Free Cash Flow (FCF):	Free Cash Flow (FCF): 	Higher the proportion of cash flow from operations (CFO) available as
free cash flow (FCF) 	post meeting all the capital expenditure requirements, higher is the 	margin of
safety.
An investor would notice that the companies which have 	a higher margin of 	safety in their business model
have a higher ability to successfully face tough economic times. This is because, in the case of economic
downturn, these company can safely:
 	reduce its profitability (i.e. give discounts) to generate higher demand
 	reduce dividends to conserve funds to make additional investments and
 	invest in fixed assets to improve its plant 	& machinery/technology (leading to lower NFAT) and
 	are still able to maintain their 	current sales growth rate.
Therefore, if an investor focuses on investing in companies, which have a good margin of safety built in
their business model, then she need not worry a lot about such companies, even if the economy faces a
downturn as these companies can withstand downturns successfully and the investor would not face any
negative surprises.
It is also essential that the investor purchases these companies at a reasonable price to equity (P/E) ratio
levels, which ensure that her investments enjoy a reasonable margin of 	safety in the purchase price as well.
The investor can follow the guidelines in the following article to determine the investable P/E ratio of the
stocks:

-- 232 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
232 |	232 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Every new stock in the investor’s portfolio mandates her to follow certain key events to monitor the stock
& company effectively. In a year, every new stock would require the investor to read:
 	4 quarterly results
 	4 shareholding pattern disclosures with pledge details
 	1 annual report
 	1 credit rating report
 	Regular stock exchange filings and
 	Monitoring the internet for news related to the company (Google Alert)
An investor would notice that a portfolio would 25 stocks would require the investor to read every year 	100
quarterly results, 100 shareholding disclosures, 25 annual reports, 25 credit rating reports, 	about 250 stock
exchange filings (assuming 10 exchange filings by each company in a year) and about 5,000 news items
(Google alerts) related to these 25 companies.
Therefore, the time & effort required in the regular & effective monitoring of each stock should lead the
investor to have only that many stocks in her portfolio, which she easily monitor. It is advised that an
investor should have as low the number of stocks in her portfolio as possible. This would ensure that she
spends a minimum amount of time monitoring her stock portfolio. In any case, 	the number of stocks should
be such that she can sleep peacefully without worrying about high exposure to any individual company.
An investor should choose her stocks only after doing sufficient due diligence. This is to ensure that she
has analysed the stocks from all 	the relevant perspectives of financial, business, management and valuation
perspectives so that there is no weakness in the company that might have missed 	her analysis.
Once an investor has done sufficient analysis while initially buying the stock, then she might rest assured
that the company would not give a lot of negative surprises to her during the regular monitoring. This
would, in turn, reduce the time 	& effort needed from 	the investor in monitoring the stocks in her portfolio.
Until now, we have noticed that a retail investor is well placed to match & outperform her institutional
counterparts because she does not have to face the continuous scrutiny of portfolio performance. She can
take a long-term view, can benefit from bear markets and can deploy additional money every month into
attractive opportunities irrespective of market conditions.
The only constraint that the retail investor faces is 	the scarcity of time at 	her disposal to effectively analyse
and monitor her stocks because, after a hectic day job, she has to meet other commitments on her time
related to family, recreation, entertainment etc.

-- 233 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
233 |	233 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
We also noticed that a 	retail investor can counter the constraint of the lack of 	time by being very selective
about her stocks. She should invest in 	very few companies, which enjoy a 	high margin of safety in 	business
and purchase price and select these 	companies after sufficient due diligence in terms of 	financial, business,
management and valuation analysis.
By being very diligent in her 	stock selection, the retail investor would ensure that her portfolio companies
do not put a lot of time requirement on her for regular monitoring and at the same time do not present her
with negative surprises with their business performance.
Over time, we have noticed that there are certain type of companies and certain key guidelines, which if a
retail investor follows diligently, then she would have higher probability of finding ideal stocks for her
portfolio, which would be fundamentally sound as 	well as would not 	put a lot 	of pressure on her 	time for
continuous 	monitoring/tracking.
An investor should focus on investing in stocks of companies which are:
1. 	growing at a respectable pace,
2. 	have sustained profitability,
3. 	are generating free cash flows,
4. 	are conservatively financed [very low debt to equity (D/E) ratio: preferably debt-free] and
5. 	are run by competent & 	shareholder-friendly management
Investing in stocks of the companies, which meet all the 	above criteria would ensure that the investor would
invest only in the companies that have:
 	a competitive advantage depicted by 	sales growth with sustained/improving profitability
 	The presence of free 	cash flows would ensure that:
o 	the sales/profits are genuine and the company is not doing aggressive sales recognition,
fictitious sales recognition without cash collection as well 	as
o 	ensure that the company does not have a capital intensive business model because the
company is able to meet 	its capex requirements from its cash flow 	from operations
 	Debt free status/low D/E ratio would ensure that:
o 	the company has fundamentally sound capital structure
o 	low/nil bankruptcy risk
o 	low/no incentive to management/promoter to cook 	its books by doing accounting juggleries
o 	low probability of the 	company facing liquidity constraints.
 	Management assessment is the most important factor as management/promoter is the person
standing between the fruits of the business and the retail shareholder. If the management does not
have interests of minority retail shareholders in its mind, then, 	unfortunately, the retail shareholder
would not be able to benefit from the good business performance of the companies in which she
has invested.

-- 234 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
234 |	234 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Therefore, we believe that if 	a retail shareholder focuses on being highly selective in her 	equity investments
and invests in very few 	companies meeting the criteria of high margin of 	safety in their business and invests
in them at an attractive price, then she has a very high probability of managing her time requirements
between 	daytime 	job, 	family 	and 	equity 	investments 	as 	well 	as 	she 	has 	high 	probability 	of
matching/outperforming her 	institutional peers.
It is essential that the retail investor puts in sufficient due diligence before investing in any company and
that she keeps the number 	of stocks in her portfolio to the minimum without losing her 	peaceful sleep.
It is also essential that she should invest only in companies, which meet the key parameters 	of sales growth
with sustained/improving profitability, which are generating free cash flows, which are conservatively
financed (preferably debt free) and are run by a competent & shareholder friendly management.
Once an investor has invested in such stocks, then she would be happy when the price of her stocks goes
up as she would enjoy the feeling of building up wealth. Moreover, if the prices of her 	stocks go down, then
also she would be happy as 	she can buy more of 	such fundamentally good stocks.
If a retail investor is able to keep in view these guidelines while creating her equity portfolio, then we
believe that she 	would 	be able 	to generate significant amount of 	wealth from 	equity markets without 	putting
a lot of strain 	on her personal and professional life and with minimal risk of 	facing negative surprises in her
stocks thereby ensuring the safety of her 	hard earned money.
Effectively, if the retail investor follows these guidelines, then she can sleep peacefully at night despite
investing a significant amount of her money in stocks.

-- 235 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
235 |	235 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
At www.drvijaymalik.com, we provide following additional premium services 	to our readers:
1.1. 	Follow Dr Vijay Malik's Portfolio with Latest Buy/Sell Transaction Updates	Follow Dr Vijay Malik's Portfolio with Latest Buy/Sell Transaction Updates
2.2. 	Stock Analysis Excel Template (compatible with Screener.in)	Stock Analysis Excel Template (compatible with Screener.in)
3.3. 	"Peaceful Stock Investing" Workshops	"Peaceful Stock Investing" Workshops
4. 	Guest 	Lectures/Sessions
The premium services may be 	availed by readers at the following dedicated section of our website:
http://premium.drvijaymalik.com/	http://premium.drvijaymalik.com/
Brief details of each of the premium services are provided below:
This premium service has been commenced as an information source for the investors who wish to know
about the stocks that we are buying currently or the stocks that we have sold recently. This is purely an
information source and services like advising individual clients on portfolio allocation etc. are not 	a part of
this service.
Our stock portfolio has its srcins in August 2011, when we invested our initial savings from the first job
after MBA (2009-11). We have 	been able to invest in some of 	the fundamentally good stocks at the initial
stage of their growth phase, which were later on discovered by research/brokerage houses and witnessed
investments from institutional investors.
The recognition of stocks by key 	market players have helped to 	generate significant gains for the portfolio
as the underlying stocks got rerated and increased in 	value. A few such examples are: 	Ambika Cotton Mills
Limited, Vinati Organics Limited, Mayur Uniquoters Limited etc.
We started investing in Ambika Cotton Mills Limited in September 2014, when it was 	trading at very low
valuation levels. The stock was later on identified by the well-known value investor Prof. Sanjay Bakshi,
who invested in it 	through his fund “ValueQuest India Moat Fund Ltd” in March 2015.
Similarly, other stocks like Vinati Organics Limited and Mayur Uniquoters witnessed increased FII buying
and thereby generated good returns by increase in share price. The 	increased FII buying led to the P/E ratio
of Mayur Uniquoters increasing from 6.6 to above 30 and P/E ratio of Vinati Organics increasing from 7.7
to above 20. This increase in valuations led to significant increase in the contribution of these stocks in the
portfolio returns.
This premium service was commenced on July 30, 2016. The portfolio had generated annualized return
(CAGR) exceeding 71.67% from the start date of portfolio August 8, 2011 up to July 30, 2016 (at closing
prices of July 29, 2016).

-- 236 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
236 |	236 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Since July 30, 2016 up to January 27, 2017, the portfolio has generated annualized return (CAGR/XIRR)
of 45.30% against the decline in BSE Sensex levels from 28,051.86 (closing price on July 29, 2016) to
27,882.46 (closing level on January 27, 2017) representing annualized return (CAGR/XIRR) of 	-1.21%
The total annualized return from the start date of portfolio August 8, 2011 up to January 27, 2017 stands at
64.27%.
 	During the same period BSE Sensex level has increased from 16,990.18 (August 8, 2011) to
27,882.46 (January 27, 2017) representing an annualized rate (CAGR) of 	9.47%
 	During the same period NSE Nifty level has 	increased from 5,118.50 (August 8, 2011) to 8,641.25
(January 27, 2017) representing an annualized rate (CAGR) of 	10.03%
Readers/investors who wish to know about the details of our portfolio and the recent transactions with
regular updates may subscribe to this premium service 	for one year 	or two years at the 	following link:
The subscription service for “Follow My 	Portfolio” involves the following features:
1. 	Update by email about all the future transactions (buy as well as sell) in my portfolio at the end of
the day of the transaction (after market closing hours) during the period of the subscription. The
email update would contain the details of the stock bought/sold and the price at which the
transaction was done.
2. 	Access to the premium section containing updated details of my portfolio and the list of all the
transactions from the start of this service (July 30, 2016) until date during the subscription period,
at the following link: 	http://premium.drvijaymalik.com/portfolio/	http://premium.drvijaymalik.com/portfolio/
The information about composition of the portfolio to be available in 	the following format:
S. No.	S. No.
Name of the	Name of the
Company	Company
% age of	% age of
portfolio	portfolio
(current	(current
price)	price)
Avg Cost	Avg Cost
Price (₹)	Price (₹)
First Buy	First Buy
Date	Date
Latest	Latest
Buy Date	Buy Date
Lowest	Lowest
Buy Price	Buy Price
(₹)	(₹)
Highest	Highest
Buy Price	Buy Price
(₹)	(₹)
11 	ABC 	Limited 	xx% 	xx.xx 	dd-mm-yy 	dd-mm-yy 	xx.xx 	xx.xx
22 	DEF 	Limited 	xx% 	xx.xx 	dd-mm-yy 	dd-mm-yy 	xx.xx 	xx.xx
33 	XYZ 	Limited 	xx% 	xx.xx 	dd-mm-yy 	dd-mm-yy 	xx.xx 	xx.xx
The details of all the transactions from the start of this service (July 30, 	2016) until date in my portfolio to
be available in the following format:

-- 237 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
237 |	237 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
S. No.	S. No. 	Date	Date
Name of the	Name of the
Company	Company 	Buy/Sell	Buy/Sell 	Share Price (₹)	Share Price (₹)
11 	dd-mm-yy 	XYZ 	Limited 	Buy 	xx.xx
22 	dd-mm-yy 	XYZ 	Limited 	Buy 	xx.xx
33 	dd-mm-yy 	ABC 	Limited 	Buy 	xx.xx
44 	dd-mm-yy 	XYZ 	Limited 	Buy 	xx.xx
55 	dd-mm-yy 	DEF 	Limited 	Buy 	xx.xx
Whenever I will do any buy/sell transaction in my portfolio, an email notification would be sent to
subscribers at the end of the 	day, which would contain the information in the following format:
Date | Name of the Company |	Date | Name of the Company | 	Buy/Sell | Price (₹)	Buy/Sell | Price (₹)
This premium service has been commenced as an information source for the investors who wish to know
about the stocks that I am 	buying currently or the stocks that I have 	sold recently.
However, there are certain key points of this service:	However, there are certain key points of this service:
1. 	The intimation to investors would always be after 	closing of the market hours on 	the day on which
I have done any buy/sell transaction.
2. 	There is no 	provision of any research report/recommendation note to be published/made available
to investors as this service is to provide a glimpse to the investors into my personal portfolio
management and related actions. For more details, please read the answers to the frequently asked
question (FAQs) below.
3. 	This service has been designed to act as 	an information source to subscribers about the composition
of my portfolio and the stocks that I am buying/selling currently. This is purely an information
source and services like advising individual clients on portfolio allocation etc. is not a part of this
service.
4. 	I would not be able to provide responses to questions about specific stocks in the portfolio and
specific buy/sell decisions.
5. 	This service does not include intimating the 	subscribers in advance about the buy/sell decisions that
I would take about specific stocks.
Investors who wish to avail this service may subscribe by 	clicking on the following link:

-- 238 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
238 |	238 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
1. 	This is a subscription service. The access to premium features of this service would lapse after
subscription period gets over unless the renewal is done.
2. 	Once this premium service is availed, then there is no provision of any refund of the fee or the
cancellation of the service during the period of subscription.
3. 	Please take note that "Follow 	My 	Portfolio" service is 	an 	information 	service and 	not a
investment/portfolio advisory service.
P.S: Please read the frequently asked questions (FAQs) on the following product details page to know about
the key aspects and clarifications about this service:
http://premium.drvijaymalik.com	http://premium.drvijaymalik.com/product/follow-my-portfolio	/product/follow-my-portfolio-with-latest-buysell-transac	-with-latest-buysell-transactions-	tions-
updates/	updates/
We use a customized excel template to analyse stocks as per our preferred parameters by using the data
downloaded from screener.in website. The template acts as a dashboard of 	key analysis parameters, which
help us in making an opinion about any stock within a short amount of time (sometimes within a few
minutes). We have used this excel template and the 	analysis output in many stock analysis articles published
on this website.
You may read 	about various stock analysis articles written by analyzing companies using the excel 	template
in the "Author's Response" segments on the following link: 	Stock Analysis Articles	Stock Analysis Articles
In the past, many readers/investors have asked us to provide the copy of this excel file. However, until now,
we have not put the excel template in the public domain for download. We have always advised investors
to customize the standard screener excel template as per their own preferences and their learning about
stock analysis from different sources. Customization of excel template on her own can be a very good
learning exercise for any investor.
However, due to repeated requests for sharing the excel template, We 	have decided to make the customized
excel stock analysis template, which is compatible with screener.in 	and provides stock data as a 	dashboard,
as a paid download feature.
Investors who wish to get the customized excel stock analysis template may download it from the 	following
link:

-- 239 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
239 |	239 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The structure and sample screenshots of the stock analysis excel 	template file are as below:
This sheet presents values of more than 40 key parameters in the form of a dashboard. These parameters
cover analysis of profitability, capital structure, valuation, margin of safety, cash 	flow, creation of wealth,
sources of funds, growth rates, return 	ratios, operating efficiency etc.
Having a quick look at these parameters in the form of the dashboard helps in quick assessment about the
company, its historical performance and its current state of 	affairs.
Screenshot of large resolution output of the Analysis Sheet: 	Click Here	Click Here

-- 240 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
240 |	240 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
This sheet contains details about description and interpretation of about each of the more than 40
parameters. It 	is advised that 	investors should read this sheet 	in detail before 	starting with the 	analysis of
companies by using this template.
Screenshot of the Description Sheet: 	Click Here	Click Here
This sheet contains details about the steps by step apporach to get started with this sheet on screener.in	website, change in settings for Microsoft Excel to resolve common issues and other instructions for the
buyers.
Screenshot of the Instructions Sheet: 	Click Here	Click Here
This sheet contains details about the changes/updates made in each of 	the new versions of the sheet.
You may read about various stock analysis articles and see the screenshots of the excel template in the
"Author's Response" segments on the 	following link: 	Stock Analysis Articles	Stock Analysis Articles
The stock analysis excel template was 	initially made available for download on July 11, 2016. 	Hundreds of
investors have downloaded the same and quite a few of them have provided their inputs about the excel
template. Here are some of the responses sent by the users of this template:
“This is a great tool for getting down to the heart of a company's financials.
When I was doing my MBA at NYU I had a valuation professor who encouraged everyone in the class of
60 to make their own customized sheet similar to what you've made. I was a fan of Buffett so I remember
keeping some of his metrics in view and creating a sheet! Of course yours is head and shoulders above
anything else I've seen - 	kudos!”
- Uday (via email)
The excel template is quite useful. It makes things easy for us in not doing the hard labor and calculating
all vital data for 	each company separately.
- Ashish (in comments on the 	article at drvijaymalik.com)
“Thank you Dr. Malik. 	The tool is indeed very useful and super-fast to use. God bless you for creating it!
Please use this as part of ur training to perform financial analyses of different types of companies in different
performance contexts across industries. I am sure others will also love it.”

-- 241 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
241 |	241 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
- Harsh (via email)
"Dear Sir, I have downloaded the excel. It's simply AMAZING, EFFORTLESS and AWESOME. Kudos
to you and your team for wonderful creation.."
- Vikram (via email)
“Very good tool created for Stock analysis. Very helpful. Thank you sir”
- Jiten (via email)
For further details please read this 	article:
http://premium.drvijaymalik.com/product/stock-analysis-excel-template-screener-in/	http://premium.drvijaymalik.com/product/stock-analysis-excel-template-screener-in/
P.S: Please read all the instructions on the payment page, carefully before making the purchase of the excel
template.
“Peaceful Stock Investing” workshops are full day workshops (9AM to 6PM) heldon selected Sundays.
The workshops are focused on stock selection and analysis skills, which would make us much more
confident about our stock decisions. It ensures 	that our faith would not shake with 	day to day market 	price
fluctuations and we would be able to reap true benefits of stock markets to fulfill our dream of financial
independence.

-- 242 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
242 |	242 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
The workshops focus on the fundamental stock analysis of 	stocks with a detailed analysis of various sources
of information available to investors like annual reports, quarterly results, credit rating reports and online
financial resources.
You may learn more about the workshops, pre-register/express interest for a workshop in your city by
providing your details on the following 	page:
Pre-Register & Express Interest for a Stock Investing Workshop in Your City	Pre-Register & Express Interest for a Stock Investing Workshop in Your City
I am open to 	addressing an audience of stock investors about various aspects of 	fundamental stock investing.
Please note that I follow a bottom-up fundamental analysis approach in which I look for high growth
companies generating free cash flows from their operations, which are conservatively financed, being run
by competent & shareholders' friendly management, and are available at attractive stock prices. 	Therefore,
the topics that I would 	be willing to cover and 	the message that I would deliver 	in such guest lectures would
also be related to this 	approach.
I would not be able to give an opinion about individual stocks, events, technical analysis in the guest
lectures.
You may read about a seminar that I had with Moneylife here: 	Finding Stocks that are backed by right	Finding Stocks that are backed by right
management - MoneyLife	management - MoneyLife
You may read the feedback of the audience for the Moneylife seminar here: 	Audience Feedback	Audience Feedback
If you are interested in 	hosting a guest lecture, then you may contact me 	at vijay.malik@drvijaymalik.com
for further details.

-- 243 of 244 --

www.drvijaymalik.com
243 |	243 | 	Page
Copyright © Dr Vijay Malik. All Rights Reserved.
Epilogue	Epilogue
With this we have come to an end to the 	book, where we learnt about the types of investing approaches, the
key required characteristics of the investor, steps to identify potentially investment worthy stocks and
conducting detailed analysis of stocks to take the investing decision by learning to conduct financial,
valuation, business, management, operating efficiency analysis. We learned about the steps to assess the
margin of safety in 	any stock, identifying the investable P/E ratio, 	reading annual reports, quarterly filings
and credit rating reports. We also learned about the steps to decide about the number of portfolio stocks,
steps to monitor those stocks and finally the reasons to 	decide about selling the stocks.
I believe that the above chapters cover all the aspects of stock investing that are 	required to be understood	
by an 	individual equity investor. If an 	investor reads the 	chapters in 	detail and applies the 	learnings from
this book in her stock assessment process, then she would be able to find out fundamentally strong
companies, which would be able to generate significant wealth for her over long periods of time. Such
companies would prove to be an ideal investment opportunity for the hard earned 	money of the individual
equity investor.
I suggest that the readers should read the chapters of this book multiple times, jot down notes, take out key
points and in turn apply the learnings to frame their own stock analysis process. Having a process of stock
analysis would hold an investor in a good 	position across business and market cycles as the investor would
be able to decide about stocks in a dispassionate manner by keeping her emotions in check.
With this final note, I complete the message that I wished to communicate to you through this book. I
appreciate the time taken by you to go through all the chapters while imbibing the concepts & the
information.
I wish you the 	best in your investing journey. May you achieve the financial independence soon!

-- 244 of 244 --

