

-- 1 of 144 --

The 22
Immutable Laws
of Marketing
Violate Them at Your Own Risk
Al Ries and Jack Trout

-- 2 of 144 --

Dedicated to the elimination of
myths and misconceptions
from the marketing process

-- 3 of 144 --

Contents
Introduction ix
1. 	The Law of Leadership
2. 	The Law of the Category
3. 	The Law of the Mind
4. 	The Law of Perception
5. 	The Law of Focus
6. 	The Law of Exclusivity
7. 	The Law of the Ladder
8. 	The Law of Duality
9. 	The Law of the Opposite
10. The Law of Division
11. The Law of Perspective
12. The Law of Line Extension
13. The Law of Sacrifice
14. The Law of Attributes
15. The Law of Candor
16. The Law of Singularity
17. The Law of Unpredictability
18. The Law of Success
19. The Law of Failure
20.The Law of Hype
21. The Law of Acceleration
22. The Law of Resources
Warning
About the Author
Credits
Copyright
About the Publisher
Cover

-- 4 of 144 --

Introduction
Billions of dollars have been wasted on marketing
programs that couldn’t possibly work, no matter how
clever or brilliant. Or how big the budgets.
Many managers assume that a well-designed, well-exe-
cuted, well-financed marketing program will work. It’s not
necessarily so. And you don’t have to look further than IBM,
General Motors, and Sears, Roebuck to find examples.
The tools and techniques used at Sears, Roebuck might
have been right, sometimes even spectacular. And the man-
agers who ran the GM programs might have been the best
and the brightest. Certainly the best and the brightest peo-
ple traditionally have been attracted to the biggest and the
best companies, like GM and IBM. But the programs
themselves were based on assumptions that were flawed.
John 	Kenneth 	Galbraith, 	when 	asked 	what 	he
believed was America’s perception of the country’s
giant 	corporations, 	said 	that 	we 	feared 	corporate
power. Today, we fear corporate incompetence!

-- 5 of 144 --

All companies are in trouble. Especially big compa-
nies. General Motors is a good example. Over the past
decade the company paid a terrible price for destroy-
ing the identity of its brands. (It priced them alike as
well as made them look alike.) Ten share points evap-
orated, which translates into about $10 billion a year in
sales.
GM’S 	problem 	wasn’t 	a 	competitive 	problem,
although competition did increase. It wasn’t a quality
problem either, although GM obviously wasn’t deliv-
ering top-notch quality. It was very definitely a mar-
keting problem.
When a company makes a mistake today, foot-
prints quickly show up on its back as competition
runs off with its business. To get the business back,
the company has to wait for others to make mistakes
and then figure out how to exploit the situation.
So how do you avoid making mistakes in the
first place? The easy answer is to make sure your
programs are in tune with the laws of marketing.
(Although we have defined our ideas and con-
cepts under the “marketing” banner, they are use-
ful no matter where you are in a company, and no
matter what product or service your company is
selling.)
What are these marketing laws? And who brought
them down from Mount Sinai on a set of stone tablets?
The 	fundamental 	laws 	of 	marketing 	are 	those
described in this book.
But who says so? How come two guys from Connecticut
INTRODUCTION

-- 6 of 144 --

have discovered what thousands of others have over-
looked? There are, after all, many sophisticated market-
ing practitioners and academics. Why have they missed
what we think is so obvious?
The answer is simple. As far as we can tell, almost
no one is willing to admit that there are any laws of
marketing—certainly none that are immutable.
There are laws of nature, so why shouldn’t there be
laws of marketing? You can build a great-looking air-
plane, but it’s not going to get off the ground unless it
adheres to the laws of physics, especially the law of
gravity. You can build an architectural masterpiece on
a sand dune, but the first hurricane will undermine
your creation. So it follows that you can build a bril-
liant marketing program only to have one of the
immutable laws knock you flat if you don’t know what
they are.
Perhaps it’s human nature not to admit there are
things you can’t do. Certainly most marketers believe
that anything is achievable if you are energetic enough,
or creative enough, or determined enough. Especially
if you are willing to spend enough money.
Once you open your mind to the possibility that
there are laws of marketing, it’s easy to see what they
are. In truth, they are obvious.
We have been studying what works in marketing
and what doesn’t for more than 25 years. What we
have found is that programs that work are almost
always in tune with some fundamental force in the
marketplace.
INTRODUCTION

-- 7 of 144 --

In our books, articles, speeches, and videos we have
analyzed marketing principles in some detail. We have
developed strategic models of the marketing process,
including a physical model of the human mind, which
we helped popularize under the concept of “position-
ing.” We also developed a military model of the mar-
ketplace, 	which 	assigns 	companies 	and 	brands 	to
either 	defensive, 	offensive, 	flanking, 	or 	guerrilla
modes of marketing warfare.
After years of working on marketing principles and
problems, we have distilled our findings into the basic
laws that govern success and failure in the market-
place.
We call these principles the Immutable Laws of
Marketing, and there are 22 of them. Violate them at
your own risk.
INTRODUCTION

-- 8 of 144 --



-- 9 of 144 --

1
The Law of
Leadership
It’s better to be first
than it is to be better.
2

-- 10 of 144 --

Many people believe that the basic issue in market-
ing is convincing prospects that you have a better
product or service.
Not true. If you have a small market share and you
have to do battle with larger, better-financed competi-
tors, then your marketing strategy was probably faulty
in the first place. You violated the first law of market-
ing.
The basic issue in marketing is creating a category
you can be first in. It’s the law of leadership: It’s bet-
ter to be first than it is to be better. It’s much easier to
get into the mind first than to 	try to convince some-
one you have a better product than the one that did get
there first.
You can demonstrate the law of leadership by ask-
ing yourself two questions:
1) What’s the name of the first person to fly the
Atlantic Ocean solo? Charles Lindbergh, right?
2) What’s the name of the second person to fly the
Atlantic Ocean solo? Not so easy to answer, is it?
The second person to fly the Atlantic Ocean solo
was 	Bert 	Hinkler. 	Bert 	was 	a 	better 	pilot 	than
Charlie—he flew faster, he consumed less fuel. Yet
who has ever heard of Bert Hinkler? (He left home and
Mrs. Hinkler hasn’t heard from him since.)
In spite of the evident superiority of the Lindbergh
approach, most companies go the Bert Hinkler route.
They wait until a market develops. Then they jump in
3

-- 11 of 144 --

with a better product, often with their corporate name
attached. In today’s competitive environment, a me-too
product with a line extension name has little hope of
becoming a big, profitable brand (chapter 12: The Law
of Line Extension).
The leading brand in any category is almost always
the first brand into the prospect’s mind. Hertz in rent-
a-cars. IBM in computers. Coca-Cola in cola.
After World War II, Heineken was the first import-
ed beer to make a name for itself in America. So four
decades later, what is the No. 1 imported beer? The
one that tastes the best? Or Heineken? There are 425
brands of imported beer sold in America. Surely one of
these brands must taste better than Heineken, but does
it really matter? Today, Heineken is still the No.1
imported beer, with 30 percent of the market.
The first domestic light beer was Miller Lite. So
what is the largest-selling light beer in America today?
The one that tastes the best? Or the one that got into
the mind first?
Not every first is going to become successful, how-
ever. Timing is an issue—your first could be too late.
For example, USA Today is the first national newspa-
per, but it is unlikely to succeed. It has already lost
$800 million and has never had a profitable year. In a
television era, it may be too late for a national newspa-
per.
Some firsts are just bad ideas that will never go any-
where. Frosty Paws, the first ice cream for dogs, is
unlikely to make it. The dogs love it, but the owners
4
THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING

-- 12 of 144 --

are the ones who buy the groceries, and they think that
dogs don’t need an ice cream of their own. They
should be happy just to lick the plates.
The law of leadership applies to any product, any
brand, any category. Let’s say you didn’t know the
name of the first college founded in America. You can
always make a good guess by substituting leading for
first. So what’s the name of the leading college in
America? Most people would probably say Harvard,
which is also the name of the first college founded in
America. (What’s the name of the second college
founded in America? The College of William and
Mary, which is only slightly more famous than Bert
Hinkler.)
No two products are any similar than twins are. Yet
twins often complain that the first of the two whom a
person 	meets 	always 	remains 	their 	favorite, 	even
though the person also gets to know the other one.
People tend to stick with what they’ve got. If you
meet someone a little better than your wife or husband,
it’s really not worth making the switch, what with
attorneys’ fees and dividing up the house and kids.
The law of leadership also applies to magazines.
Which is why Time leads Newsweek, People leads Us,
and Playboy leads Penthouse. Take TV Guide, for
example. Back in the early fifties the then-powerful
Curtis Publishing Company tried to field a television-
listings magazine to compete with the fledgling TV
Guide. Even though TV Guide had only a minuscule
head start, and despite the awesome strength of Curtis,
5
THE LAW OF LEADERSHIP

-- 13 of 144 --

the Curtis publication never really got off the ground.
TV Guide had preempted the field.
The law of leadership applies equally as well to
hard categories like automobiles and computers as it
does to soft categories like colleges and beer. Jeep was
first in four-wheel-drive off-the-road vehicles. Acura
was first in luxury Japanese cars. IBM was first in
mainframe computers. Sun Microsystems was first in
workstations. Jeep, Acura, IBM, and Sun are all lead-
ing brands.
The first minivan was introduced by Chrysler. Today
Chrysler has 10 percent of the car market and 50 per-
cent of the minivan market. Is the essence of car market-
ing making better cars or getting into the market first?
The first desktop laser printer was introduced by a
computer company, Hewlett-Packard. Today the com-
pany has 5 percent of the personal computer market
and 45 percent of the laser printer market.
Gillette was the first safety razor. Tide was the first
laundry 	detergent. 	Hayes 	was 	the 	first 	computer
modem. Leaders all.
One reason the first brand tends to maintain its
leadership is that the name often becomes generic.
Xerox, the first plain-paper copier, became the name
for all plain-paper copiers. People will stand in front of
a Ricoh or a Sharp or a Kodak machine and say, “How
do I make a Xerox copy?” They will ask for the
Kleenex when the box clearly says Scott. They will
offer you a Coke when all they have is Pepsi-Cola.
How many people ask for cellophane tape instead
6
THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING

-- 14 of 144 --

of Scotch tape? Not many. Most people use brand
names 	when 	they 	become 	generic: 	Band-Aid,
Fiberglas, Formica, Gore-Tex, Jello, Krazy Glue, Q-
tips, Saran Wrap, Velcro—to name a few. Some people
will go to great lengths to turn a brand name into a
generic. “FedEx this package to the Coast.” If you’re
introducing the first brand in a new category, you
should always try to select a name that can work gener-
ically. (Lawyers advise the opposite, but what do they
know about the laws of marketing?)
Not only does the first brand usually become the
leader, but also the sales order of follow-up brands
often matches the order of their introductions. The best
example is ibuprofen. Advil was first, Nuprin was sec-
ond, Medipren was third. That’s exactly the sales order
they now enjoy: Advil has 51 percent of the ibuprofen
market, Nuprin has 10 percent, and Medipren has 1
percent.
The 	fourth 	brand 	that 	entered 	the 	market 	was
Motrin IB. Even though it has the powerful prescrip-
tion name for ibuprofen, Motrin’s market share is only
15 percent. (Keep in mind that Advil was introduced
with a “Same as the prescription drug Motrin” theme.)
And note the generic substitution. Consumers use
Advil as a generic term. Rarely do they use the word
ibuprofen. Even an M.D. will tell a patient, “Take two
Advil and call me in the morning.”
Also consider Tylenol, the first brand of acetamino-
phen. Tylenol is so far ahead of the No. 2 brand that it’s
hard to determine who is No. 2.
7
THE LAW OF LEADERSHIP

-- 15 of 144 --

If the secret of success is getting into the prospect’s
mind first, what strategy are most companies commit-
ted to? The better-product strategy. The latest and
hottest subject in the business management field is
benchmarking. Touted as the “ultimate competitive
strategy,” benchmarking is the process of comparing
and evaluating your company’s products against the
best in the industry. It’s an essential element in a
process often called “total quality management.”
Unfortunately, 	benchmarking 	doesn’t 	work.
Regardless of reality, people perceive the first product
into the mind as superior. Marketing is a battle of per-
ceptions, not products.
So what’s the name of the first brand of aspirin? The
first brand of acetaminophen? The first brand of
ibuprofen? 	(Hint: 	Substitute 	leading 	for 	first 	and
you’ll have the answers to these three questions.)
Charles Schwab bills itself as “America’s largest dis-
count broker.” Are you surprised that the Charles Lindbergh
of the discount brokerage business is Charles Schwab?
Neil Armstrong was the first person to walk on the
moon. Who was second?
Roger Bannister was the first person to run a four-
minute mile. Who was second?
George Washington was the first president of the
United States. Who was second?
Thomas’ was the first brand of English muffin.
What was second?
Gatorade was the first sports drink. What was sec-
ond?
8
THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING

-- 16 of 144 --

If you’re second into the prospect’s mind, are you
doomed to languish forever with Buzz Aldrin, John
Landy, John Adams, some unknown English muffin,
and some unknown sports drink? Not necessarily.
Fortunately, there are other laws.
9
THE LAW OF LEADERSHIP

-- 17 of 144 --

2
The Law of
the Category
If you can’t be first in a category,
set up a new category you can be first in.
10

-- 18 of 144 --

What’s the name of the third person to fly the
Atlantic Ocean solo?
If you didn’t know that Bert Hinkler was the second
person to fly the Atlantic, you might figure you had no
chance at all to know the name of the third person. But
you do. It’s Amelia Earhart.
Now, is Amelia known as the third person to fly the
Atlantic Ocean solo, or as the first woman to do so?
After Heineken became a big success, the people
at Anheuser-Busch could have said, “We should bring
in an imported beer, too.” But they didn’t. Instead
they said, “If there’s a market for a high-priced
imported beer, maybe there’s a market for a high-
priced domestic beer.” And so they started to promote
Michelob, the first high-priced domestic beer, which
today 	out-sells 	Heineken 	two 	to 	one. 	(Actually,
Anheuser-Busch also brought in an imported beer,
Carlsberg, 	which 	has 	a 	very 	good 	reputation 	in
Europe. In the United States, however, the me-too
Carlsberg never went anywhere.)
Miller Lite was the first domestic light. It took an
importer five years to say, “If there’s a market for a
domestic light beer, maybe there’s a market for an
imported light beer.” The result was Amstel Light,
which became the largest-selling imported light beer.
If you didn’t get into the prospect’s mind first, don’t
give up hope. Find a new category you can be first in.
It’s not as difficult as you might think.
After IBM became a big success in computers,
everybody and his brother jumped into the field.
11

-- 19 of 144 --

Burroughs, 	Control 	Data, 	General 	Electric,
Honeywell, NCR, RCA, Sperry. Snow White and the
seven dwarfs, they were called.
Which dwarf grew up to become a worldwide power-
house, with 126,000 employees and sales of $14 billion,
a company often dubbed “the second largest computer
company in the world”? None of them. The most success-
ful computer company of the seventies and eighties, next
to IBM, was Digital Equipment Corporation. IBM was
first in computers. DEC was first in minicomputers.
Many other computer companies (and their entre-
preneurial owners) became rich and famous by follow-
ing a simple principle: If you can’t be first in a catego-
ry, set up a new category you can be first in.
Tandem was first in fault-tolerant computers and
built a $1.9 billion business. So Stratus stepped down
with 	the 	first 	fault-tolerant 	minicomputer. Today
Stratus is a $500 million company.
Are the laws of marketing difficult? No, they are
quite simple. Working things out in practice is another
matter, however.
Cray Research went over the top with the first
supercomputer. Today, Cray is an $800 million compa-
ny. So Convex put two and two together and launched
the first minisupercomputer. Today, Convex is a $200
million company.
Sometimes you can turn an also-ran into a winner
by inventing a new category. Commodore was just
another manufacturer of home personal computers
that wasn’t going anywhere until it positioned the
12
THE 22 IMMUTABLE LAWS OF MARKETING

-- 20 of 144 --

Amiga as the first multimedia computer. Today the
Commodore Amiga is a big success, with more than
$500 million worth sold annually.
There are many different ways to be first. Dell got into the
crowded personal computer field by being the first to sell
computers by phone. Today Dell is a $900 million company.
When you launch a new product, the first question
to ask yourself is not “How is this new product better
than the competition?” but “First what?” In other
words, what category is this new product first in?
Charles Schwab didn’t open a better brokerage
firm. He opened the first discount broker.
Lear’s was not the first woman’s magazine. It was
the first magazine for the mature woman. (The maga-
zine for the woman who wasn’t born yesterday.)
This is counter to classic marketing thinking, which
is brand oriented: How do I get people to prefer my
brand? Forget the brand. Think categories. Prospects
are 	on 	the 	defensive 	when 	it 	comes 	to 	brands.
Everyone talks about why their brand is better. But
prospects have an open mind when it comes to cate-
gories. Everyone is interested in what’s new. Few peo-
ple are interested in what’s better.
When you’re the first in a new category, promote
the category. In essence, you have no competition.
DEC told its prospects why they ought to buy a mini-
computer, not a DEC minicomputer.
In the early days, Hertz sold rent-a-car service.
Coca-Cola sold refreshment. Marketing programs of
both companies were more effective back then.
13
THE LAW OF THE CATEGORY

-- 21 of 144 --

3
The Law of
the Mind
It’s better to be first in the mind
than to be first in the marketplace.
14

-- 22 of 144 --

The world’s first personal computer was the MITS
Altair 8800.
The law of leadership would suggest that the MITS
Altair 8800 (an unfortunate choice of names) ought to
be the No. 1 personal computer brand. Unfortunately,
the product is no longer with us.
Du Mont invented the first commercial television
set. Duryea introduced the first automobile. Hurley
introduced 