

-- 1 of 96 --



-- 2 of 96 --

CAPITAL ALLOCATORS
How the world’s elite money managers lead and
invest
TED SEIDES

-- 3 of 96 --

Contents
Praise for Capital Allocators
About the Author
Acknowledgments
About Capital Allocators
How to Use This Book
Introduction
Active versus Passive
The case for passive management
The case for active management
Part 1: Toolkit
Chapter 1: Interviewing
Defining the purpose
Preparing
Setting the stage
Active listening
Receiving feedback
Additional tips
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 2: Decision-Making
Why this is so hard
Making better decisions
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 3: Negotiations
Preparation
Updating views
Additional tips
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 4: Leadership
Define a vision
Set standards of conduct
Communicate consistently and frequently
Behave authentically
Inspire and motivate
Adapt and evolve
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 5: Management
Hiring
Organizational design
Project management
Talent development
Time management
Summary

-- 4 of 96 --

To learn more
Part 2: Investment Frameworks
Chapter 6: Governance
Roles and responsibilities
Investment committee
Incentives
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 7: Investment Strategy
Purpose
Time horizon
Natural habitat
Policy portfolio
Team structure
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 8: Investment Process
Sourcing managers
Target characteristics
Due diligence
Portfolio construction
Monitoring
Icing on the cake
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 9: Technological Innovation
Asset allocation
Risk measurement
Risk management
Performance assessment
Leading edge of data analytics
Summary
To learn more
Chapter 10: Case Study of Uncertainty
Part 3: Nuggets of Wisdom
Chapter 11: Investment Lessons
Nature of markets
Inconvenient truths
Managing volatility
Investment selection
Gaining an edge
Asset class perspectives
Chapter 12: Life Lessons
Managing emotions
Continuous improvement
Relationships
Work ethic
Facing reality
What matters most
Chapter 13: The Top 10

-- 5 of 96 --

Appendices
Appendix A: Initial Manager Meeting Outline
Background
Investment approach
Initial meeting question list
Appendix B: To Learn More
Interviewing
Decision-making
Negotiations
Leadership
Management
Governance
Investment strategy
Investment process
Data analysis
Appendix C: Directory of Guests on Capital Allocators
Publishing details

-- 6 of 96 --

For the virtuous circle of guests and listeners on the Capital Allocators podcast
And especially for my wife Vanessa, whose enthusiastic support from the front row seat lights up the
stage

-- 7 of 96 --

Praise for Capital Allocators
Through his podcast, Ted has talked with the best investment minds in the world. Capital Allocators assembles this
collective wisdom into an incredible guidebook for anyone who wants to be truly thoughtful about long-term
investing.
– Raphael Arndt, CEO, Australia Future Fund
Capital Allocators is jam-packed with actionable advice from the world’s leading investment experts on topics
ranging from interviewing managers to decision-making. Ted distills the wisdom of his impressive array of podcast
guests into a compendium that deserves highlighting on every page. Take it from me, choosing to read Capital
Allocators is a good decision.
– Annie Duke, former professional poker player, best-selling author, and decision strategist
Ted Seides has achieved a remarkable book that draws on the expertise and experience of a broad cross-section of
industry leaders. He expertly distills interviews that he conducted directly into a book that seamlessly covers
executive, leadership and investment skills and lessons. Capital Allocators is a well-crafted and informative read
for existing and prospective investment professionals as well as for those who work with the investment industry in
any capacity.
– Gregory J. Fleming, President & CEO, Rockefeller Capital Management
A fantastically broad, deep guide to the asset allocator’s world. I wish it had been written 25 years ago. The
quotations in it are alone worth the price. You can quote me on that.
– Andrew Golden, CIO, Princeton University Investment Management Company (PRINCO)
Ted understands the nuance of investment management better than anyone I know, because he’s talked to more
investors than anyone I know. It’s been said that books don’t change minds; sentences do. There are so many good
lines in this book it’s hard to put down.
– Morgan Housel, Partner at Collaborative Fund and best-selling author
Unlike many ‘invest like the best’ books, Capital Allocators does not pretend there is some magical trick that will
turn anyone into an investing genius. Instead, Ted Seides details how great investors do the hard work that leads
to better outcomes. You won’t get rich quick reading this book, but if you take the time to really understand the
lessons it teaches, you will be a better, more thoughtful investor.
– Ben Inker, Head of Asset Allocation, GMO
Capital Allocators is an excellent collection of toolkits and frameworks for investing that reflect both the
institutions and the different styles of their CIOs. Capital Allocators is a starting manual for all the things aspiring
CIOs need to consider as they develop their style and strategic vision. Importantly, Ted acknowledges that there
are many ways to be a successful CIO and that CIOs can learn from each other in that diversity of viewpoints.
– Ana Marshall, CIO, William and Flora Hewlett Foundation
The world of institutional investing needed Ted’s voice – it just didn’t know it yet. With this book, and with his
unparalleled podcast, Ted has brought a whole hidden world to a broader audience, and anyone interested in how
the world’s most prominent investors move money is better for it.
– Kip McDaniel, Editor-in-Chief, Institutional Investor
Ted has made the world of capital allocation approachable for everyone across hundreds of conversations. Now
he’s further distilled the lessons into a package that will make any investor better at what they do. Required
reading.
– Patrick O’Shaughnessy, CEO, O’Shaughnessy Asset Management
This book boils down the most interesting insights and important lessons from the biggest and most powerful
investors on earth – the ones that literally put the capital in capitalism. It offers a glimpse into the thinking of
capital allocators in a coherent and digestible format. It should be required reading for anybody interested in
investing and certainly will be for my students!
– Ashby H. B. Monk, PhD, Executive Director, Global Projects Center, Stanford University
Page by page, Ted Seides’ Capital Allocators brings us tools, frameworks and a rich collection of wisdom captured
from his professional network. Ted’s book allows us to discover how successful CIOs incorporate various aspects of
the investment process and lessons learned in navigating financial markets. This book should be mandatory for any
investment teams aspiring to evolve and win.
– Mario Therrien, Head of Investment Funds and External Management, Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec
I have learned something from every podcast, and this book pulls them all together. There is no one right way to be
a CIO, we are all unique, but there are still lessons that we can learn from one another and value that comes from

-- 8 of 96 --

understanding the nuances among us. Thank you, Ted, for providing a forum for CIOs to share ideas and for
writing this great collection of highlights.
– James Williams, CIO, J. Paul Getty Trust

-- 9 of 96 --

About the Author
Ted Seides, CFA has spent 25 years as an institutional investor, allocating money to managers. He started in 1992
at the Yale University Investments Office, seven years after David Swensen arrived at Yale. Ted spent five years
learning under David’s tutelage and departed to attend Harvard Business School shortly before David wrote the
bible in the industry, Pioneering Portfolio Management.
Ted spent a summer job and two years after business school investing directly at three of Yale’s managers, hedge
fund Brahman Capital, and private equity firms Stonebridge Partners and J.H. Whitney & Company. He learned
that life inside the sausage factory is rarely as clean as the final product appears.
He returned to investing through managers in 2002, co-founding and serving as President and Co-Chief Investment
Officer of Protégé Partners. Protégé was a leading multibillion-dollar alternative investment firm that invested in
and seeded small hedge funds. In 2010, Larry Kochard and Cathleen Rittereiser profiled Ted in the book Top
Hedge Fund Investors, and in 2016 Ted authored So You Want to Start a Hedge Fund: Lessons for Managers and
Allocators to share lessons from his experience.
On a slow day in 2007, Ted had the bright idea to challenge a statement made by Warren Buffett about the
superiority of index funds over hedge funds. With aspirations to demonstrate the value of hedge funds to
institutional portfolios, he initiated a charitable wager with Warren that pitted the 10-year performance of the S&P
500 against a selection of five hedge fund of funds from 2008–2017. Protégé Partners lost the bet, and Ted still
wonders about the probability distribution of outcomes and the quality of his decision process.
In 2017, Ted launched the Capital Allocators podcast, a series of interviews with leading Chief Investment Officers.
The show reached four million downloads in August 2020. Barron’s, Business Insider, ValueWalk, and Forbes each
named it among the top investing podcasts. He also advises asset managers and allocators across business
strategy, audio content, and investing.
Ted writes opinion pieces for Institutional Investor, wrote a blog for the CFA Institute’s Enterprising Investor and
guest publications for the late Peter L. Bernstein’s Economics and Portfolio Strategy.
You can hear Ted’s story in his own words on Capital Allocators episodes 45 (It’s Not About the Money), 34 (Deep
Dive on Hedge Funds), and 5 (The Bet with Buffett).

-- 10 of 96 --

Acknowledgments
My father lost his parents at a young age. His father passed away at age 52, and my dad never thought he would
live a day past that. Still smiling at 87, every day of the last 35 years has offered unexpected upside.
The Capital Allocators podcast has been the same for me. I started it without an objective or goal. Thanks to
incredible guests, engaged listeners, the magic of compounding and optionality, the experience has offered a
cornucopia of upside surprises.
The guests who share their stories are the stars of the show and receive my deepest gratitude. Almost all the
guests who appeared during the first year are friends from my time in the business. Thank you for sharing our
conversations publicly without any expectation of benefit. These talented professionals backed this endeavor with
their time and wisdom and laid the groundwork for what happened since.
Guests repeatedly shared stories of tangible and intangible benefits that accrued to them after coming on the
show. Most hear from old friends and colleagues, and many find it productive for their investing and business. It’s
been gratifying to deliver that goodwill and offer all future guests a hint that positive surprises will come out of
their appearance. As a bonus, for every handful of guests who I didn’t know before the podcast conversation, one
has evolved into a meaningful relationship. I’m so glad we met in this way.
This show has created a virtual community. The audience is just as important as the guests to its strength. An
engaged audience attracts great guests, which in turn helps keep the quality of content high and the audience
growing. Our community of listeners ranges from leading allocators and money managers around the world to
interested students of investing from all walks of life. Thank you for choosing to spend your precious time listening
to the show.
Over the last three years, I’ve received countless notes of thanks. Each one reminds me that this effort is a lot
bigger than me and energizes me to carry on. Thank you for those kind words.
Although I didn’t set out to pursue this adventure as a livelihood, a series of serendipitous circumstances led to
that outcome. I am deeply appreciative to all the advertisers, corporate sponsors, premium content members, and
advisory clients who support the business around the show.
Patrick O’Shaughnessy has been my brother-in-arms on this journey. He has been my sounding board and thought
partner on style, best practices, and the business of podcasting. He is a force of nature, an inspiration, and a
wonderful friend.
Christopher Seifel is the catalyst who made this book happen. A year ago I reached out to my mailing list
(www.capitalallocators.com) to ask for assistance in gleaning the best quotes from each show. Christopher went
above and beyond, outlining each episode with a page and a half of quotes. I had thought about this project for a
while but couldn’t imagine finding the time to go back and review thousands of pages of transcripts. Part 3 of the
book draws heavily on Christopher’s outstanding curation of the episodes.
Connor Aller joined me as an intern two years ago to manage the behind the scenes production of the website and
special projects. He has enthusiastically cranked through everything I asked of him, while performing at the
highest level in his day job. Thanks Connor, I could not have had the bandwidth to take on this project without your
help.
Craig Pearce at Harriman House approached me two years ago offering to publish any book I might consider
writing in the future. He offered an economic partnership and delivered as a true partner in this project every step
of the way. Thank you for your outstanding comments and suggestions that significantly improved the quality of
this book.
Brian Portnoy and Erez Kalir are great friends and accomplished thinkers who graciously commented on a draft of
this book and made it better than it could have been without their keen eyes. I am grateful for your assistance and
friendship.
My wife Vanessa Schenck-Seides has been the wind beneath my wings since the day we met. Neither of us
imagined that life would bring us together as it has, and I am incredibly grateful that it did. Thank you, my love, for
encouraging me and laughing with me every step along the way.
I come from a family of teachers. My mother retired from running a preschool some time ago, and my sister works
with special education students. My father taught graduate school alongside his medical practice for years, and my
brother almost left his career in wireless telecom to teach business school. I always assumed I would find myself in
a classroom. Apparently, I already have. Thank you for attending class each week and for picking up this textbook.

-- 11 of 96 --

About Capital Allocators
Who are these capital allocators and why have conversations with them on the Capital Allocators podcast been
listened to four million times?
Capital allocation is the process of deciding where to invest limited resources. It occurs when corporate executives
decide how to fund operations and initiatives. It occurs when portfolio managers at investment firms select and
size positions. And it occurs when Chief Investment Officers (CIOs) for end owners of capital commit to investment
products. The concept of capital allocation pervades finance and its real-world consequences are far reaching.
I created the Capital Allocators podcast in 2017 to focus on this last group, the people who sit at the top of the
global food chain of capital. When I refer to “allocators” in this book, it is the CIOs and their teams that I have in
mind.
At the bottom of the food chain, businesses are conceived by entrepreneurs. They raise capital to pursue their
ideas by selling a piece of their business or borrowing money with the intent to pay it back. They make business
decisions about which products or services to create, markets to enter, and forms of financing to fund new projects
or return capital. These decisions are important ones in the success of their business. They are also different from
the decisions faced by CIOs.
The middle of the food chain is populated by money managers. When overseeing their business, they make choices
like those of business executives. When producing their product, they make capital allocation decisions like CIOs,
picking investments and constructing portfolios.
CIOs sit at the top of the food chain. Endowments and foundations, high net worth individuals, family offices,
corporate and public pension funds, and sovereign wealth funds are end owners of capital. CIOs lead their
investment operations.
End owners of capital frequently staff their investment team with a small number of professionals. The team
occasionally invests directly in securities or deals, and more frequently allocates capital to the products run by
money managers.
Money managers often specialize in one style of investing. For example, Andreessen Horowitz, or a16z (Scott
Kupor – Capital Allocators, First Meeting episode 7), is a leading venture capital firm and Wellington Management
(Jean Hynes – episode 82) is best known for public equity and fixed income management. Others are
intermediaries, like Outsourced Chief Investment Officer (OCIO) Hirtle Callaghan (Jon Hirtle – episode 98), who
raise capital from end owners and invest it in money management products.
There are so many specialized, well-resourced money managers in different strategies around the world that one
sensible investment approach for CIOs is to identify the best of them across each area of expertise. CIOs partner
with specialists, rather than hire a team to compete with them.
CIOs are students of the entire investment universe. They have a unique vantage point to look across assets,
strategies, and geographies and build a portfolio of investments that best meets their objectives. They assess both
the merits of the money management organization and the attractiveness of the underlying assets held by the
manager. They have access and exposure to talented minds across the investment universe. Their seat is the
broadest and most fascinating in all of investing, and their decisions significantly influence how capital flows
throughout the world.
I started my career working for the most famous CIO in the world, David Swensen, who for 35 years has overseen
the Yale University Investments Office. He is a brilliant investor and gifted teacher. A dozen of David’s protégés
manage some of the largest endowments and foundations.1
In the 20 years after my apprenticeship at Yale, I continued to study money managers across public and private
markets. Three and a half years ago, I created a podcast called Capital Allocators to share conversations with a
range of CIOs around the world. I hoped to learn about different frameworks and best practices for how these
holders of the keys to the kingdom allocate their time and money.
I never expected to write another book. Most first-time authors lose the naïve boon of seeing their name on a book
jacket once they meet the reality that writing a book sucks up time and money, two of the most precious resources
we have. Yet, here I am, sitting in front of my computer, following the serendipity that called me to put pen to
paper once more.
After so many interviews with allocators, managers, and thought leaders – where each had wisdom to share about
how to enhance the investment process – I no longer could retain all the information in my head. David Swensen’s
book remains the seminal tome in explaining the structure of capital allocation of institutional portfolios. This book
is different. It endeavors to explain how these investors implement their craft.
My intent in writing is to help investors make better decisions. Investment success is increasingly challenging with
every passing year, and the breadth of skills required to succeed expands commensurately. The lessons imparted
by guests on the podcast speak to the needed skills and prereq