

-- 1 of 259 --



-- 2 of 259 --

SAURABH MUKHERJEA, RAKSHIT RANJAN,
SALIL DESAI
DIAMONDS IN THE DUST
Consistent Compounding for Extraordinary Wealth Creation

-- 3 of 259 --

PENGUIN BOOKS

-- 4 of 259 --

Contents
Foreword by Sir John Kay
Introduction: Test Cricket and Investing: A Classic Analogy
1. The Four Most Damaging Myths in Indian Investing
2. What to Buy—Part 1: Accounting Quality
3. Accounting Quality: Spotting the Naughty Lenders
4. What to Buy—Part 2: Great Franchises
5. What to Buy—Part 3: Masters of Capital Allocation
6. When to Buy?
7. Preparing an Investment Plan
Conclusion: Lessons from Rahul Dravid: Combining Technical Abilities with Behavioural Skills
Appendix 1: The Marcellus Checklist
Appendix 2: Sir John Kay’s Ibas Framework
Appendix 3: Robert Kirby’s Coffee Can Investing Method
Glossary
Notes
Acknowledgements
Follow Penguin
Copyright

-- 5 of 259 --

Advance Praise for the Book
‘Diamonds in the Dust is a wonderful book for people who want to grow and
maintain their wealth. With a number of solid research findings, the book
explains why investing in companies’ equity is the path to investment success.
The process of analysing companies is explained in a systematic and clear way.
The authors also reveal the most damaging myths of investing. They explain
how to evaluate firms’ competitive advantages and capital allocation. I
particularly liked the various checklists giving all the important items needed
when studying companies. Finally, the use of specific investor case studies bring
to life all the principles given in the book. This book will certainly help you find
those investment diamonds in the dust!’—Mark Mobius, founder, Mobius
Capital Partners
‘The translation of deep competitive advantages into wealth creation for
shareholders is one of the most appealing aspects of equity investing. This book
from the team at Marcellus lays out with great clarity how this process unfolds.
If you care about wealth creation in modern India, you should read this book.’—
Harsh Mariwala, chairman, Marico Ltd
‘Diamonds in the Dust is an eye-opener, on a subject of great relevance.
Through the pages of this lucidly written book, the team at Marcellus explains
why investing in clean, well-managed companies selling essential products to
1.4 billion Indians is a simple and sound path to wealth creation. The authors
present their well-researched arguments with great conviction, in a manner that
is so easy to understand. A compelling read, indeed.’—Harish Bhat, author of
Tata Log and #Tata Stories
‘If you are a direct stock picker or would like to be, here is a book that gives you
a to-do and a not-to-do checklist along with a method to the process.’—Monika
Halan, author of Let’s Talk Money: You’ve Worked Hard for It, Now Make It
Work for You

-- 6 of 259 --

‘Wealth creation via the construction of powerful franchises is one of the most
exciting facets of a fast-growing economy. The team at Marcellus has simplified
and amplified this narrative better than anyone else in India. The result is an
engrossing book which lays out the fundamental principles of successful equity
investing in India.’—Sanjeev Bikhchandani, co-founder and vice chairman,
Info Edge (India) Ltd

-- 7 of 259 --

To all the remarkable people, who together help Marcellus Investment
Managers look after the assets of many thousands of hardworking Indian
families

-- 8 of 259 --

Disclaimer
The following stocks mentioned in the book are part of one or more portfolios
managed or advised by Marcellus:
Asian Paints 	Maruti Suzuki
HDFC Bank 	Page Industries
Abbott India 	Garware Technical Fibres
Divi’s Labs 	HDFC Asset Management Company
TCS 	GMM Pfaudler
Pidilite Industries 	Dr Lal Pathlabs
Kotak Bank 	Info Edge (India)
Nestlé India 	Titan Company

-- 9 of 259 --

Foreword
I have known Saurabh Mukherjea for more than twenty-five years, since—newly
graduated—he joined my economic consulting business. I have watched his
subsequent career with pleasure and pride, as he became interested in equity
research, and we were involved together in a London venture, Clear Capital.
And then followed his return to India and rise to become one of the leading
figures in India’s asset management community and a regular commentator on
investment matters.
Saurabh and I share the firm belief that successful investment requires a
knowledge of business. This sounds obvious, and yet it does not seem to be
obvious to most people who manage their own money or other people’s. They
are interested in securities markets, not product markets; in stocks, not
companies. They are fixated on the idea that businesses should make the
numbers, but wiser investors are fixated on the idea that businesses should make
goods and services that people will want to buy and want to go on buying for
years to come. The dichotomy was well expressed for me in an exchange with a
well-regarded London fund manager, as we tried to persuade him to take an
interest in business strategy. ‘I don’t care about competitive advantage,’ he said.
‘I just want to know which stocks are going to go up.’ I knew that I would not
want to trust any money to his management or want any of my friends, or
encourage any funds I advise to do so.
Marcellus is founded on the principle that, to understand the stock, you must
first understand the company. Not only does competitive advantage matter, in
the long run, it is the only thing that matters. In this book, you will learn that
successful investors look to fundamental value. Real businesses with real
capabilities. As I write this, I am bombarded with invitations to buy meme
stocks, baseball cards, cryptocurrencies and non-fungible tokens. But the
tendency for price to revert to fundamental value is a basic law of investment.
And it is a core tenet of ‘coffee can investing’. As Warren Buffett puts it, if you
aren’t willing to hold it for ten years, do not hold it even for ten minutes. Long
run stock returns are asymmetric—a small number of stocks account for a high

-- 10 of 259 --

run stock returns are asymmetric—a small number of stocks account for a high
proportion of overall market returns. Appreciation of the underlying economics
of the business gives you the best, indeed the only, chance of holding these
outstanding stocks.
No one said successful investment was easy. But this book will lead you
carefully through the underlying principles. You will learn how to see through
deceptive accounting. You will not learn how to time the market, but you will
learn that even if you were able to do it, by some prescience no one else has yet
achieved, the returns from market timing are far less than the returns from
effective stock picking. You will learn the nature of competitive advantage, and
how to identify sources of competitive advantage that are appropriable and
sustainable. To invest well, you must understand these things—or entrust your
funds to someone who does, like Marcellus. I hope this book will encourage
many people to take control of their own wealth management. And if for you
that is a leap too far, as it is for many people, this book will certainly enable you
to ask the right questions of your financial adviser.
London 	Sir John Kay
4 June 2021

-- 11 of 259 --

Introduction
Test Cricket and Investing: A Classic Analogy
‘Amidst the cacophonous tumult of India, there is a tendency to look for greatness and
leadership amongst those who have flair, flamboyance and a certain sense of extroversion. But
perhaps because the country is so prone to major upheavals . . . those who achieve long-lasting
success in India are often those who are unflashy, introverted, determined and intelligently
tenacious . . . in cricket, no one exemplifies this more than Rahul Dravid . . . the Coffee Can
companies are the Rahul Dravids of the business world—rare, determined and constantly
seeking to improve the edge or the advantage they enjoy vis-à-vis their competitors.’
—Saurabh Mukherjea, in Chapter 9 of The Unusual Billionaires (2016)
Peak performance in Test cricket requires not just technical proficiency but also
intelligence and immense powers of concentration. In that regard, Test cricket
and investing in Indian equities have interesting parallels, an appreciation of
which can help newcomers understand the process of investing and the toolkits
required to build a durably successful investment portfolio.
WHY EQUITY INVESTING IN INDIA PARALLELS TEST CRICKET
As a group of cricket lovers, we at Marcellus are not just crazy followers of the
sport, but from time to time also find inspiration from it and its heroes in our
personal and professional lives. And, given that ours is an entire nation of cricket
lovers, we have also found cricketing analogies to be the most effective in
communicating our investing approach.
Many people perceive investing as something involving constant action,
including watching share prices all the time and reacting quickly to news flow
and market movements. The general belief is that such ‘active’ investing yields
result in the immediate future. However, it seldom works like that. Investing is
not like a T20 match where you attempt to hit every ball out of the park. It is
more like Test cricket, where you do not even attempt to play every ball, let
alone try to hit it to the boundary. In Test cricket, you choose your shots
carefully, leave the deliveries outside the off stump alone, score your ones and
twos regularly, and dispatch the occasional loose ball to the boundary. The key
to successful investing, therefore, is to first leave the risky stocks alone, then to
identify the ones that can grow earnings and cash flows steadily, and once you

-- 12 of 259 --

find such stocks, to bet big on them. Also, as in Test cricket, investing requires
the player to not just possess the relevant skills and training but also the mental
conditioning and discipline to apply those skills and training consistently. More
crucially, investing requires the patience to play a long innings, which, as in Test
cricket, is the assured way to victory. The difference between successful and
unsuccessful investing is, in many ways, the difference between Test cricket and
T20.
The skill-building process for an investor starts ten years later compared to
that of a budding batter. Most investors are in their early twenties when they first
learn the analysis of financial statements and valuation techniques. While these
are the foundational concepts of investing, the young investor tends to
understand only the superficial aspects of these concepts. In other words, in her
formative years, she learns the language of investing but doesn’t, as yet, fully
understand or appreciate its deeper significance.
Then, as she grows older and becomes a more experienced investor, she learns
how to go deeper into these concepts and appreciates what they really mean. For
example, she understands how companies deliberately cook their books so that
investors end up overvaluing them and paying more for their shares than they
really should. She also comprehends better why a small minority of companies is
able to create competitive advantages so powerful that no rivals are able to
effectively compete with it for years, even decades, on end.
While the time taken by an individual cricketer or investor to mature and then
peak varies from person to person, a very small minority of players/investors is
able to excel over long periods of time. To go deep and truly excel for ten and
twenty years requires talent in cricket and intelligence in investing. At the same
time, both call for deep thinking, alongside a growth mindset (which pushes you
to address your deficiencies), focused hard work and a multi-disciplinary skill-
set (rather than a one-dimensional, inflexible mindset).
And, if investing is akin to Test cricket, who better to emulate than Rahul
Dravid, the greatest Test batter to play for India and one of the greats of the
game across all eras and all countries. His skill-set, which on the face of it looks
simple, is actually very hard to acquire.
IF INVESTING IS LIKE TEST CRICKET, INVESTORS SHOULD AIM TO
BE LIKE RAHUL DRAVID

-- 13 of 259 --

BE LIKE RAHUL DRAVID
‘By any meaningful reckoning . . . he was India’s greatest match-winning batsman, with 24
away wins (Sachin Tendulkar has 20) where he averaged nearly 70. When imponderables are
introduced into the equation, with such things as the ability to absorb pressure and match
impact, he is the greatest series-defining batsman in the history of Test cricket, his count of
eight series-defining performances greater than anybody else’s.’
—Suresh Menon1
‘Rahul’s batting was poetic, with flowing follow-throughs that capitalised on exceptional
footwork and a rock-solid base. His head was like the statue of David, allowing for perfect
balance.’
—Steve Waugh2
ADELAIDE, 2003
When the Indian cricket team toured Australia in 2003-04, memories of the
repeated hammerings that India had received in that country through the 1990s
were still fresh in everyone’s mind. In fact, as India was going into the series,
cynics in the country were talking in terms of celebrating if the Indian side even
managed to take a single Test match into the fourth day. Since this was to be
Aussie legend Steve Waugh’s final Test series, the consensus view was that the
Aussies would go the extra mile to defeat India and seal Waugh’s already
legendary status as the most successful captain in Test history.
Rahul Dravid, the Indian team’s vice-captain in the 2003-04 series, had had a
traumatic tour to Australia in India’s previous outing there in 1999-2000, with
scores of 35, 6, 9, 14, 19 and 0 in the four tests played there. He had a poor run
of form, and India were whitewashed 3-0 in that Test series. As Dravid later
admitted,
The whole phase was quite tough for me. Three tests against Australia and then hardly a break
before we played two tests against South Africa at home. I had more doubts about my game in
that period than I’ve ever done . . . I was out of form . . . I was not batting well. I was not getting
into good positions. I got out to balls that I had lost track of. I didn’t feel confident . . . Let’s just
say that I wasn’t good enough and they were too good for me . . . 3
After Dravid began unimpressively in the first Test of the 2003-04 series—
which India managed to draw thanks to a century from their captain, Saurav
Ganguly—Indian cricket lovers started fearing a repeat of the 1999-2000 horror
show. Then came the second Test in Adelaide, which shook the world and took
Dravid’s game and his reputation to a different level.
The second Test at the Adelaide Oval began on 12 December 2003 with the

-- 14 of 259 --

The second Test at the Adelaide Oval began on 12 December 2003 with the
Australian batsmen taking the Indian bowling to the cleaners. At the end of the
first day, Australia had put 400 on the board with only 5 wickets down. They
added a few more runs on day two to finish their first innings at 556. In next to
no time, India collapsed to 85 for 4, with both Tendulkar and Ganguly back in
the pavilion. It was at that point that Rahul Dravid stepped forward to play a
seminal innings, which not only swung that Test match towards India but also
ended an era of Australian domination over visiting Indian sides.
Dravid’s 233 runs in the first innings of the 2003 Test in Adelaide took
exactly ten hours. As a result of Dravid’s epic effort, India trailed Australia by
only 33 after both sides had finished their first innings. Australia then collapsed
for 196 in the second innings, with Ajit Agarkar taking 6 wickets. Set 230 to win
the match, a nervous Indian batting line-up stuttered to 170 for 4 (once again
with Tendulkar and Ganguly back in the hut). Dravid again came to the fore,
with 72 not out, and once he had smashed a Stuart MacGill final long-hop past
cover—Dravid ‘roared and kissed the India crest on his cap.’4 India thus attained
their first Test victory in Australia since 1981. If you watch the video of this
memorable Test match, you can see the wild celebration among the Indian
supporters, commentators and cricketers and understand how much this victory
meant to the nation.5
As Aakash Chopra, who opened the batting for India in that series, said many
years later, ‘The Australians have the habit of forcing batsmen into making a
mistake. But Rahul did not make a single mistake during that innings. They were
trying to force him, but he was in no mood to oblige.’6
The Australians have similar recollections of the Adelaide Test match. Nine
years later, Jason Gillespie, who led the Australian attack in the Adelaide Test
match, said:
. . . in Adelaide there was good bounce and carry, and we thought that if we stuck to our plans,
we could get anyone out. But the way Dravid played, essentially, he was more patient than us
bowlers. We became impatient, especially when he scored that double-century, because we
could not get him out, and that made us go away from our game plan. That in turn worked for
him because his plan was to wait for the bowler to lose patience.7
A few weeks after the Adelaide epic, Rahul Dravid told writer and journalist
Rohit Brijnath in an interview that in the second innings, as he steered India to a
historic win, ‘I didn’t feel in much control. I had to fight through periods,

-- 15 of 259 --

refocus, reminding myself of what I wanted to achieve. My goal was to not get
out, to make it as difficult as I could.’8
Dravid then talked about his frame of mind on the final morning of the
Adelaide Test match:
We had a quiet confidence. We knew we had a great chance to win and we knew we could do it.
Of course, we were a bit nervous, and it was natural. We had lost a lot of matches we should
have won in the past. I was quite determined to not let that happen again . . . We had worked so
hard . . . so we had to win . . . I told myself that I needed to do whatever it took, that whatever
happened I would try to be there at the end. I had to give it all I had.9
The final word on Dravid’s superhuman effort in Adelaide in 2003 belongs to
his then captain, Saurav Ganguly, who said, ‘Rahul batted like God.’10
THE GREATEST NUMBER 3 IN TEST CRICKET
Besides his Herculean feats in famous Test matches—like those of Adelaide in
2003, Eden Gardens in 2001, Headingley in 2002, Rawalpindi in 2004 and
Jamaica in 2006—the distinctions of being the fourth-highest run getter in Test
cricket, with 13, 288 runs (the second-highest Indian run scorer after Sachin
Tendulkar), and of having faced more Test deliveries than any other (31, 258 to
be precise i.e. 5, 210 overs) batter, are also his.
Batting at number three, Rahul Dravid scored more Test runs—10,524—in
that position than any other batter in the history of the game. His sixteen-year
international career has an often overlooked but significant statistic—in that
period, Dravid scored more runs than Sachin Tendulkar. Dravid made an
incredible 23 per cent of the runs scored by India in the twenty-one Test
victories under Ganguly’s captaincy, at a ‘Bradmanesque’ average of 103.11
Those victories put India on the road to becoming the number one Test team in
the world in the late 2000s.
During his Test career, whilst Dravid was at the crease, the Indian cricket
team scored over 32,000 runs, which amounts to 35.6 per cent of the total runs
that India made in the Tests which Dravid played. No other Indian player has a
score of over 30 per cent for this metric. Dravid is also the only batter in Test
cricket history to have batted in more than 700 partnerships; in fact, no other
batter has recorded even 650 partnerships so far.12

-- 16 of 259 --

Outside India, Rahul Dravid averaged 53.03 runs per innings. That is the
second best ‘away-from-home’ average achieved by any Indian Test batter
(Tendulkar leads with an away average of 54.7).13 In all, eight of Dravid’s eleven
man-of-the-match awards were won in overseas Tests, and five in overseas wins.
In 