TEAMFLY
Team-Fly ®

-- 1 of 240 --

T H E
M I N D
M C KINSEY

-- 2 of 240 --

This page intentionally left blank.

-- 3 of 240 --

New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City
Milan New Delhi San Juan Seoul Singapore Sydney Toronto
T H E
E T H A N 	M . 	R A S I E L
A U T H O R O F T H E M C K I N S E Y W A Y
A N D 	PA U L N . F R I G A
Understanding and Implementing the Problem-
Solving Tools and Management Techniques
of the World’s Top Strategic Consulting Firm
M I N D
M C KINSEY

-- 4 of 240 --

Copyright © 2002 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. Except
as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any
form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
0-07-140554-2
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-137429-9.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trade-
marked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of
infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corpo-
rate training programs. For more information, please contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com
or (212) 904-4069.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and
to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to
store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create deriv-
ative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-
Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly
prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS”. McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WAR-
RANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM
USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA
HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUD-
ING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your
requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you
or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom.
McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall
McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that
result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This
limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or other-
wise.
DOI: 10.1036/0071405542

-- 5 of 240 --

For Emma, Jessica, and Talia—EMR
For Meredith (motivation), Mom (direction), Dad (curiosity),
and Lido (energy)—PNF

-- 6 of 240 --

This page intentionally left blank.

-- 7 of 240 --

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments 	ix
Introduction 	xi
1. Framing the Problem 	1
2. Designing the Analysis 	31
3. Gathering the Data 	49
4. Interpreting the Results 	83
5. Presenting Your Ideas 	103
6. Managing Your Team 	127
7. Managing Your Client 	159
8. Managing Yourself 	173
Appendix A: Data-Gathering Resources 	187
Appendix B: Lessons from The McKinsey Way 	205
Appendix C: Implementation Lessons 	209
Index 	213
vii
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 	Click Here for Terms of Use.

-- 8 of 240 --

This page intentionally left blank.

-- 9 of 240 --

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First and foremost, I would like to thank my coauthor, Paul
Friga. This book discusses the virtues of teamwork at length,
and I can think of no better example of successful teamwork than
our collaboration. This book is much stronger for it. He has
pushed my thinking in new and productive directions; I trust he
can say the same of me. —Ethan M. Rasiel
 	 	
Without question, the first acknowledgment goes to my coau-
thor, Ethan Rasiel. First, he graciously brought me into the process
after already achieving great success with his solo effort on his first
book, The McKinsey Way. Second, he offered incredible insight,
enthusiasm, and direction. And third, he taught me lessons in per-
sistence, storytelling, and unselfishness. —Paul N. Friga
 	 	
The authors owe thanks to many without whom this book
would not be in your hands. First, their agent, Daniel Greenberg at
James Levine Communications, Inc.; their editor, Mary Glenn;
Katherine Hinkebein; and the entire team at McGraw-Hill who
made this book a reality. Joe Burton, Simon Carne, Jerry Friga, Ed
ix
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 	Click Here for Terms of Use.

-- 10 of 240 --

Pringle, and Paul Sansone made insightful suggestions in the early
stages of this manuscript. Our research assistants, Lindsay Cage,
Rebecca Jones, and especially Karen Jansen, rendered invaluable
support administering questionnaires, researching ideas, and orga-
nizing material. David Ernsthausen at the Kenan-Flagler School
of Business at the University of North Carolina provided expert
assistance with the knowledge management section of this book,
and Peggy Pickard, also of UNC, ensured that we had the facili-
ties we needed for our frequent conferences and brainstorming
sessions.
Most of all, we are grateful to all those McKinsey alumni who
gave us interviews or answered our questionnaires: Jim Bennett,
Omowale Crenshaw, Dean Dorman, Naras Eechambadi, Bob
Garda, Evan Grossman, Eric Hartz, Paul Kenny, Stevie McNeal,
Sylvia Mathews, Bill Ross, Larry Rouvelas, Jeff Sakaguchi, Dan
Veto, Steve Anderson, Alan Barasky, Martha Blue, Roger Boisvert,
Francesca Brockett, Bob Buchsbaum, Ciara Burnham, S. Neil
Crocker, Dominik Falkowski, Brad Farnsworth, Shyam Girid-
haradas, Barbara Goose, Francesco Grillo, Reggie Groves, Fred
Kindle, Deborah Knuckey, Heiner Kopperman, Kurt Lieberman,
Lee Newman, Leah Niederstadt, Ron O’Hanley, Rainer Siggelkow,
Chacko Sonny, and Jim Whelan, as well as many others, who, for
reasons of their own, wish to remain anonymous. We could not
have written this book without them.
x 	Acknowledgments
TEAMFLY
Team-Fly ®

-- 11 of 240 --

INTRODUCTION
ABOUT THIS BOOK
February 1999 saw the publication of The McKinsey Way by
Ethan M. Rasiel, a former associate of management-consulting
powerhouse McKinsey & Company. That book combined the—
occasionally humorous—anecdotes of McKinsey alumni with the
personal recollections of the author to describe the techniques that
McKinsey consultants use to help their clients become more effi-
cient and effective. The McKinsey Way also painted a vivid pic-
ture of life behind the walls of the publicity-shy organization that
its employees refer to as “the Firm.”
The McKinsey Mind picks up where The McKinsey Way left
off. Most of that book was taken up with a description of consult-
ing McKinsey-style in the context of a typical project—“engage-
ment” in Firm jargon. It started with the sale of the engagement
and moved step by step through the implementation of McKinsey’s
solution. It also briefly discussed the thought process that McKin-
sey consultants use to tackle tough business problems.
xi
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 	Click Here for Terms of Use.

-- 12 of 240 --

By necessity, The McKinsey Way was more descriptive than
prescriptive. With The McKinsey Mind, we take the opposite tack.
Whereas The McKinsey Way dealt with what McKinsey does, The
McKinsey Mind shows you how to apply McKinsey techniques in
your career and organization. To accomplish this, we build on the
knowledge base of The McKinsey Way but offer a different per-
spective, as we shall explain later in this Introduction. At this
point, however, we want to assure you that if you haven’t read The
McKinsey Way, you need not read it in order to understand or
profit from The McKinsey Mind.* In fact, we even provide sum-
maries of the relevant lessons from The McKinsey Way at the start
of each section of this book, as well as a list of where to find them
in Appendix B.
Anyone can use the problem-solving and management tech-
niques described in The McKinsey Way (and The McKinsey Mind);
you don’t have to be in (or even from) the Firm. We also recog-
nize that McKinsey is a unique organization. Its consultants can
call on resources not usually available to executives in other com-
panies. Its flat hierarchy allows junior consultants to make deci-
sions and express their ideas in ways that would be impossible in
more-stratified workplaces. And when working with clients, the
Firm’s consultants generally have a freedom of access and action
unavailable to most executives. With these thoughts in mind, we
realized that to take The McKinsey Way to the next level, we had
to adapt it to organizations that don’t enjoy McKinsey’s peculiar
advantages.
Fortunately, we did not have to look far for inspiration in this
regard. In researching this book, we relied on interviews with and
questionnaires from more than 75 McKinsey alumni who have
xii 	Introduction
*One of your authors, specifically Ethan Rasiel, would be very happy if, having read this
book, you decided to buy the The McKinsey Way as well.

-- 13 of 240 --

successfully implemented the Firm’s techniques and strategies in
their post-McKinsey organizations. Since leaving the Firm, they
have become CEOs, entrepreneurs, and senior decision makers in
businesses and governments around the world. If anyone could
show us what works outside McKinsey and what doesn’t, they
could—and did.
In this book, therefore, you will discover a problem-solving
and decision-making process based on McKinsey’s own, highly
successful methods but adapted to the “real world” based on—
and, we believe, strengthened by—the experiences of McKinsey
alumni in their post-McKinsey careers. You will also learn the
management techniques you will need to implement that process in
your own career and the presentation strategies that will allow you
to communicate your ideas throughout your organization.
ABOUT McKINSEY
In case you are unfamiliar with McKinsey & Company, let us offer
a few words about the organization that its members past and
present refer to as “the Firm.” Since its founding in 1923, McKin-
sey & Company has become the world’s most successful strategic
consulting firm. It currently has 84 offices (and counting) around
the world and employs some 7,000 professionals who hail from 89
countries. It may not be the largest strategy firm in the world—
some of the big accounting firms have larger practices—but it is
certainly the most prestigious. McKinsey consults to more than a
thousand clients, including 100 of the world’s 150 largest compa-
nies, as well as many state and federal agencies of the United States
and foreign governments. McKinsey is a brand name in interna-
tional business circles.
Introduction 	xiii

-- 14 of 240 --

Several senior McKinsey partners have risen to international
prominence in their own right. Lowell Bryan advised the Senate
Banking Committee during the savings and loan crisis. Jon Katzen-
bach’s books on the management of high-performance teams
appear on the bookshelves of CEOs around the world. Even more
visible are some of McKinsey’s alumni who have gone on to senior
positions around the world: Tom Peters, management guru and
coauthor of In Search of Excellence; Lou Gerstner, CEO of IBM;
and Jeff Skilling, CEO of Enron, to name but three.
To maintain its preeminent position (and to earn its high fees),
the Firm seeks out the cream of each year’s crop of business school
graduates. It lures them with high salaries, the prospect of a rapid
rise through McKinsey’s meritocratic hierarchy, and the chance to
mingle with the elite of the business world. In return, the Firm
demands total devotion to client service, submission to a grueling
schedule that can include weeks or months away from home and
family, and only the highest-quality work. For those who meet
McKinsey’s standards, promotion can be rapid. Those who fall
short soon find themselves at the latter end of the Firm’s strict pol-
icy of “up or out.”
Like any strong organization, the Firm has a powerful corpo-
rate culture based on shared values and common experiences.
Every “McKinsey-ite” goes through the same rigorous training
programs and suffers through the same long nights in the office. To
outsiders, this can make the Firm seem monolithic and forbidding.
One recent book on management consulting likened McKinsey to
the Jesuits.
The Firm has its own jargon, too. It is full of acronyms: EM,
ED, DCS, ITP, ELT, BPR, etc. McKinsey-ites call their assignments
or projects “engagements.” On an engagement, a McKinsey team
will search for the “key drivers” in their quest to “add value.” Like
most jargon, much of this is simply verbal shorthand; some of it,
xiv 	Introduction

-- 15 of 240 --

however, once understood, can be as useful to businesspeople out-
side the Firm as it is to McKinsey-ites themselves.
ABOUT THE PROBLEM-SOLVING PROCESS
Our benchmark is the problem-solving process as practiced by
McKinsey. At the most abstract level, McKinsey develops solutions
to clients’ strategic problems and, possibly, aids in the implemen-
tation of those solutions. Figure I-1 depicts our theoretical model
of problem solving, which breaks the process into six discrete ele-
ments. In The McKinsey Mind, we will focus on the central trian-
gle of this model (the items in bold).
Introduction 	xv
Problem
	Solution
Data
Intuition
Managing
• Team
• Client
• Self
Presenting
• Structure
• Buy-in
Analyzing
• Framing
• Designing
• Gathering
• Interpreting
Business Need
• Competitive
• Organizational
• Financial
• Operational
Implementation
• Dedication
• Reaction
• Completion
• Iteration
Leadership
• Vision
• Inspiration
• Delegation
Figure I-1. Strategic Problem-Solving Model

-- 16 of 240 --

• Business Need—You can’t have problem solving without a
problem or, more broadly, a need on the part of the client.
In business, those needs come in several forms: competi-
tive, organizational, financial, and operational.
• Analyzing—Once your organization has identified the
problem, it can begin to seek a solution, whether on its
own or with the help of McKinsey (or any other outside
agent). McKinsey’s fact-based, hypothesis-driven problem-
solving process begins with framing the problem: defining
the boundaries of the problem and breaking it down into
its component elements to allow the problem-solving team
to come up with an initial hypothesis as to the solution.
The next step is designing the analysis, determining the
analyses that must be done to prove the hypothesis, fol-
lowed by gathering the data needed for the analyses.
Finally comes interpreting the results of those analyses to
see whether they prove or disprove the hypothesis and to
develop a course of action for the client.
• Presenting—You may have found a solution, but it has no
value until it has been communicated to and accepted by
the client. For that to happen, you must structure your
presentation so that it communicates your ideas clearly and
concisely and generates buy-in for your solution for each
individual audience to which you present.
• Managing—The success of the problem-solving process
requires good management at several levels. The problem-
solving team must be properly assembled, motivated, and
developed. The client must be kept informed, involved, and
inspired by both the problem-solving process and the solu-
tion. The individual team members (that’s you) must strike
a balance between life and career that allows them to meet
xvi 	Introduction

-- 17 of 240 --

• the expectations of the client and the team while not
“burning out.”
• Implementation—Your organization may have accepted
your solution, but it must still implement it. This requires
the dedication of sufficient resources within the organiza-
tion, the timely reaction of the organization to any stum-
bling blocks that may arise during implementation, the
focus of the organization on completion of the tasks neces-
sary for full implementation. In addition, the organization
must institute a process of iteration that leads to continual
improvement. That process requires reassessing implemen-
tation and rededicating the organization to make addi-
tional changes identified during reassessment.
• Leadership—At the nexus of solution and implementation
comes leadership. Those at the helm of your organization
must conceive a strategic vision for the organization. They
must also provide inspiration for those in the organization
who will do the hands-on work of implementation. Finally,
they must make the right judgments regarding delegation
of authority in overseeing implementation throughout the
organization.
There is one other piece of the model: the tension between intu-
ition and data. Problem solving doesn’t take place in a vacuum.
Even McKinsey has only so many resources to throw at a prob-
lem and a limited time in which to solve it. While we are advo-
cates for McKinsey-style fact-based problem solving, we recognize
that it’s practically impossible to have all the relevant facts before
reaching a decision. Therefore, most executives make business
decisions based partly on facts and partly on intuition—gut instinct
tempered by experience. We will discuss the pros and cons of each
Introduction 	xvii

-- 18 of 240 --

element later in the book. For now, we will simply say that we
think a sound decision requires a balance of both.
As we mentioned, The McKinsey Mind will focus on the cen-
tral triangle of the consulting process—problem solving, present-
ing, and managing—that constitutes the day-to-day work of a
McKinsey consulting team. In Chapters 1 through 4, we discuss
McKinsey’s fact-based, hypothesis-driven problem-solving process
and show how you can use it to tackle the complex problems that
arise in your own organization. In Chapter 5, we introduce strate-
gies for presentation that will allow you to get your ideas across
with maximum impact, whether your audience is your boss, your
board, or your entire company. Finally, in Chapters 6 through 8,
we cover the management techniques you need to ensure that your
own problem-solving efforts run smoothly. Client needs, leader-
ship, and implementation are beyond the scope of The McKinsey
Mind; they are topics for another day and, perhaps, another book.
The chapters of The McKinsey Mind follow the same general
structure. Each chapter (except Chapter 2) is divided into two or
more sections. Each section begins with a brief discussion of the
topic at hand, followed by a summary of the relevant lessons from
The McKinsey Way. Next comes a discussion of the new lessons
we learned from our alumni along with illustrations of successful
implementation, followed by suggestions for implementing these
lessons in your own organization. Each section ends with exercises
to help you understand and practice the lessons of the section.
Since the book follows the problem-solvin