REWORK
JASON 	FRIED
INTRODUCTION
FIRSTThe new reality
TAKEDOWNSIgnore the real worldLearning from mistakes is overratedPlanning
is guessingWhy grow?WorkaholismEnough with "entrepreneurs"
GOMake a dent in the universeScratch your own itchStart making somethingNo
time is no excuseDraw a line in the sandMission statement impossibleOutside money is
Plan ZYou need less than you thinkStart a business, not a startupBuilding to flip is
building to flopLess mass
PROGRESSEmbrace constraintsBuild half a product, not a half-assed
productStart at the epicenterIgnore the details early onMaking the call is making
progressBe a curatorThrow less at the problemFocus on what won't changeTone is in
your fingersSell your by-productsLaunch now
PRODUCTIVITYIllusions of agreementReasons to quitInterruption is the enemy
of productivityMeetings are toxicGood enough is fineQuick winsDon't be a heroGo to
sleepYour estimates suckLong lists don't get doneMake tiny decisions
COMPETITORSDon't copyDecommoditize your productPick a fightUnderdo
your competitionWho cares what they're doing?
EVOLUTIONSay no by defaultLet your customers outgrow youDon't confuse
enthusiasm with priorityBe at-home goodDon't write it down
PROMOTIONWelcome obscurityBuild an audienceOut-teach your
competitionEmulate chefsGo behind the scenesNobody likes plastic flowersPress releases
are spamForget about the Wall Street JournalDrug dealers get it rightMarketing is not a
departmentThe myth of the overnight sensation
HIRINGDo it yourself firstHire when it hurtsPass on great peopleStrangers at a
cocktail partyResumes are ridiculousYears of irrelevanceForget about formal
educationEverybody worksHire managers of oneHire great writersThe best are
everywhereTest-drive employees
DAMAGE CONTROLOwn your bad newsSpeed changes everythingHow to say
you're sorryPut everyone on the front linesTake a deep breath
CULTUREYou don't create a cultureDecisions are temporarySkip the rock
starsThey're not thirteenSend people home at 5Don't scar on the first cutSound like
youFour-letter wordsASAP is poison
CONCLUSION
Inspiration is perishable

-- 1 of 128 --

RESOURCESAbout 37signals37signals products
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CHAPTER
INTRODUCTION
We have something new to say about building, running, and growing (or not
growing) a business.
This book isn't based on academic theories. It's based on our experience. We've
been in business for more than ten years. Along the way, we've seen two recessions, one
burst bubble, business-model shifts, and doom-and-gloom predictions come and go--and
we've remained profitable through it all.
We're an intentionally small company that makes software to help small
companies and groups get things done the easy way. More than 3 million people around
the world use our products.
We started out in 1999 as a three-person Web-design consulting firm. In 2004, we
weren't happy with the project-management software used by the rest of the industry, so
we created our own: Basecamp. When we showed the online tool to clients and
colleagues, they all said the same thing: "We need this for our business too." Five years
later, Basecamp generates millions of dollars a year in profits.
We now sell other online tools too. Highrise, our contact manager and simple
CRM (customer relationship management) tool, is used by tens of thousands of small
businesses to keep track of leads, deals, and more than 10 million contacts. More than
500,000 people have signed up for Backpack, our intranet and knowledge-sharing tool.
And people have sent more than 100 million messages using Campfire, our real-time
business chat tool. We also invented and open-sourced a computer-programming
framework called Ruby on Rails that powers much of the Web 2.0 world.
Some people consider us an Internet company, but that makes us cringe. Internet
companies are known for hiring compulsively, spending wildly, and failing spectacularly.
That's not us. We're small (sixteen people as this book goes to press), frugal, and
profitable.
A lot of people say we can't do what we do. They call us a fluke. They advise
others to ignore our advice. Some have even called us irresponsible, reckless, and--gasp!-
-unprofessional.
These critics don't understand how a company can reject growth, meetings,
budgets, boards of directors, advertising, salespeople, and "the real world," yet thrive.
That's their problem, not ours. They say you need to sell to the Fortune 500. Screw that.
We sell to the Fortune 5,000,000.
They don't think you can have employees who almost never see each other spread
out across eight cities on two continents. They say you can't succeed without making
financial projections and five-year plans. They're wrong.
They say you need a PR firm to make it into the pages of Time, Business Week,
Inc., Fast Company, the New York Times, the Financial Times, the Chicago Tribune, the

-- 2 of 128 --

Atlantic, Entrepreneur, and Wired. They're wrong. They say you can't share your recipes
and bare your secrets and still withstand the competition. Wrong again.
They say you can't possibly compete with the big boys without a hefty marketing
and advertising budget. They say you can't succeed by building products that do less than
your competition's. They say you can't make it all up as you go. But that's exactly what
we've done.
They say a lot of things. We say they're wrong. We've proved it. And we wrote
this book to show you how to prove them wrong too.
First, we'll start out by gutting business. We'll take it down to the studs and
explain why it's time to throw out the traditional notions of what it takes to run a
business. Then we'll rebuild it. You'll learn how to begin, why you need less than you
think, when to launch, how to get the word out, whom (and when) to hire, and how to
keep it all under control.
Now, let's get on with it.
CHAPTER
FIRST

-- 3 of 128 --

The new reality
This is a different kind of business book for different kinds of people--from those
who have never dreamed of starting a business to those who already have a successful
company up and running.
It's for hard-core entrepreneurs, the Type A go-getters of the business world.
People who feel like they were born to start, lead, and conquer.
It's also for less intense small-business owners. People who may not be Type A
but still have their business at the center of their lives. People who are looking for an
edge that'll help them do more, work smarter, and kick ass.
It's even for people stuck in day jobs who have always dreamed about doing their
own thing. Maybe they like what they do, but they don't like their boss. Or maybe they're
just bored. They want to do something they love and get paid for it.

-- 4 of 128 --

Finally, it's for all those people who've never considered going out on their own
and starting a business. Maybe they don't think they're cut out for it. Maybe they don't
think they have the time, money, or conviction to see it through. Maybe they're just afraid
of putting themselves on the line. Or maybe they just think business is a dirty word.
Whatever the reason, this book is for them, too.
There's a new reality. Today anyone can be in business. Tools that used to be out
of reach are now easily accessible. Technology that cost thousands is now just a few
bucks or even free. One person can do the job of two or three or, in some cases, an entire
department. Stuff that was impossible just a few years ago is simple today.
You don't have to work miserable 60/80/100-hour weeks to make it work. 10-40
hours a week is plenty. You don't have to deplete your life savings or take on a boatload
of risk. Starting a business on the side while keeping your day job can provide all the
cash flow you need. You don't even need an office. Today you can work from home or
collaborate with people you've never met who live thousands of miles away.
It's time to rework work. Let's get started.
CHAPTER
TAKEDOWNS

-- 5 of 128 --

Ignore the real world
"That would never work in the real world." You hear it all the time when you tell
people about a fresh idea.
This real world sounds like an awfully depressing place to live. It's a place where
new ideas, unfamiliar approaches, and foreign concepts always lose. The only things that
win are what people already know and do, even if those things are flawed and inefficient.
Scratch the surface and you'll find these "real world" inhabitants are filled with
pessimism and despair. They expect fresh concepts to fail. They assume society isn't
ready for or capable of change.
Even worse, they want to drag others down into their tomb. If you're hopeful and
ambitious, they'll try to convince you your ideas are impossible. They'll say you're
wasting your time.

-- 6 of 128 --

Don't believe them. That world may be real for them, but it doesn't mean you have
to live in it.
We know because our company fails the real-world test in all kinds of ways. In
the real world, you can't have more than a dozen employees spread out in eight different
cities on two continents. In the real world, you can't attract millions of customers without
any salespeople or advertising. In the real world, you can't reveal your formula for
success to the rest of the world. But we've done all those things and prospered.
The real world isn't a place, it's an excuse. It's a justification for not trying. It has
nothing to do with you.
Learning from mistakes is overrated
In the business world, failure has become an expected rite of passage. You hear
all the time how nine out of ten new businesses fail. You hear that your business's

-- 7 of 128 --

chances are slim to none. You hear that failure builds character. People advise, "Fail early
and fail often."
With so much failure in the air, you can't help but breathe it in. Don't inhale. Don't
get fooled by the stats. Other people's failures are just that: other people's failures.
If other people can't market their product, it has nothing to do with you. If other
people can't build a team, it has nothing to do with you. If other people can't price their
services properly, it has nothing to do with you. If other people can't earn more than they
spend ... well, you get it.
Another common misconception: You need to learn from your mistakes. What do
you really learn from mistakes? You might learn what not to do again, but how valuable
is that? You still don't know what you should do next.
Contrast that with learning from your successes. Success gives you real
ammunition. When something succeeds, you know what worked--and you can do it
again. And the next time, you'll probably do it even better.
Failure is not a prerequisite for success. A Harvard Business School study found
already-successful entrepreneurs are far more likely to succeed again (the success rate for
their future companies is 34 percent). But entrepreneurs whose companies failed the first
time had almost the same follow-on success rate as people starting a company for the first
time: just 23 percent. People who failed before have the same amount of success as
people who have never tried at all.* Success is the experience that actually counts.
That shouldn't be a surprise: It's exactly how nature works. Evolution doesn't
linger on past failures, it's always building upon what worked. So should you.
Planning is guessing

-- 8 of 128 --

Unless you're a fortune-teller, long-term business planning is a fantasy. There are
just too many factors that are out of your hands: market conditions, competitors,
customers, the economy, etc. Writing a plan makes you feel in control of things you can't
actually control.
Why don't we just call plans what they really are: guesses. Start referring to your
business plans as business guesses, your financial plans as financial guesses, and your
strategic plans as strategic guesses. Now you can stop worrying about them as much.
They just aren't worth the stress.
When you turn guesses into plans, you enter a danger zone. Plans let the past
drive the future. They put blinders on you. "This is where we're going because, well,
that's where we said we were going." And that's the problem: Plans are inconsistent with
improvisation.
And you have to be able to improvise. You have to be able to pick up
opportunities that come along. Sometimes you need to say, "We're going in a new
direction because that's what makes sense today."
The timing of long-range plans is screwed up too. You have the most information
when you're doing something, not before you've done it. Yet when do you write a plan?
Usually it's before you've even begun. That's the worst time to make a big decision.
Now this isn't to say you shouldn't think about the future or contemplate how you
might attack upcoming obstacles. That's a worthwhile exercise. Just don't feel you need to
write it down or obsess about it. If you write a big plan, you'll most likely never look at it
anyway. Plans more than a few pages long just wind up as fossils in your file cabinet.
Give up on the guesswork. Decide what you're going to do this week, not this
year. Figure out the next most important thing and do that. Make decisions right before
you do something, not far in advance.
It's OK to wing it. Just get on the plane and go. You can pick up a nicer shirt,
shaving cream, and a toothbrush once you get there.
Working without a plan may seem scary. But blindly following a plan that has no
relationship with reality is even scarier.

-- 9 of 128 --

Why grow?
People ask, "How big is your company?" It's small talk, but they're not looking
for a small answer. The bigger the number, the more impressive, professional, and
powerful you sound. "Wow, nice!" they'll say if you have a hundred-plus employees. If
you're small, you'll get an "Oh ... that's nice." The former is meant as a compliment; the
latter is said just to be polite.
Why is that? What is it about growth and business? Why is expansion always the
goal? What's the attraction of big besides ego? (You'll need a better answer than
"economies of scale.") What's wrong with finding the right size and staying there?
Do we look at Harvard or Oxford and say, "If they'd only expand and branch out
and hire thousands more professors and go global and open other campuses all over the
world ... then they'd be great schools." Of course not. That's not how we measure the

-- 10 of 128 --

value of these institutions. So why is it the way we measure businesses?
Maybe the right size for your company is five people. Maybe it's forty. Maybe it's
two hundred. Or maybe it's just you and a laptop. Don't make assumptions about how big
you should be ahead of time. Grow slow and see what feels right--premature hiring is the
death of many companies. And avoid huge growth spurts too--they can cause you to skip
right over your appropriate size.
Small is not just a stepping-stone. Small is a great destination in itself.
Have you ever noticed that while small businesses wish they were bigger, big
businesses dream about being more agile and flexible? And remember, once you get big,
it's really hard to shrink without firing people, damaging morale, and changing the entire
way you do business.
Ramping up doesn't have to be your goal. And we're not talking just about the
number of employees you have either. It's also true for expenses, rent, IT infrastructure,
furniture, etc. These things don't just happen to you. You decide whether or not to take
them on. And if you do take them on, you'll be taking on new headaches, too. Lock in
lots of expenses and you force yourself into building a complex businesss--one that's a lot
more difficult and stressful to run.
Don't be insecure about aiming to be a small business. Anyone who runs a
business that's sustainable and profitable, whether it's big or small, should be proud.
Workaholism
Our culture celebrates the idea of the workaholic. We hear about people burning
the midnight oil. They pull all-nighters and sleep at the office. It's considered a badge of
honor to kill yourself over a project. No amount of work is too much work.
Not only is this workaholism unnecessary, it's stupid. Working more doesn't mean
you care more or get more done. It just means you work more.

-- 11 of 128 --

Workaholics wind up creating more problems than they solve. First off, working
like that just isn't sustainable over time. When the burnout crash comes--and it will--it'll
hit that much harder.
Workaholics miss the point, too. They try to fix problems by throwing sheer hours
at them. They try to make up for intellectual laziness with brute force. This results in
inelegant solutions.
They even create crises. They don't look for ways to be more efficient because
they actually like working overtime. They enjoy feeling like heroes. They create
problems (often unwittingly) just so they can get off on working more.
Workaholics make the people who don't stay late feel inadequate for "merely"
working reasonable hours. That leads to guilt and poor morale all around. Plus, it leads to
an ass-in-seat mentality--people stay late out of obligation, even if they aren't really being
productive.
If all you do is work, you're unlikely to have sound judgments. Your values and
decision making wind up skewed. You stop being able to decide what's worth extra effort
and what's not. And you wind up just plain tired. No one makes sharp decisions when
tired.
In the end, workaholics don't actually accomplish more than nonworkaholics.
They may claim to be perfectionists, but that just means they're wasting time fixating on
inconsequential details instead of moving on to the next task.
Workaholics aren't heroes. They don't save the day, they just use it up. The real
hero is already home because she figured out a faster way to get things done.

-- 12 of 128 --

Enough with "entrepreneurs"
Let's retire the term entrepreneur. It's outdated and loaded with baggage. It smells
like a members-only club. Everyone should be encouraged to start his own business, not
just some rare breed that self-identifies as entrepreneurs.
There's a new group of people out there starting businesses. They're turning
profits yet never think of themselves as entrepreneurs. A lot of them don't even think of
themselves as business owners. They are just doing what they love on their own terms
and getting paid for it.
So let's replace the fancy-sounding word with something a bit more down-to-
earth. Instead of entrepreneurs, let's just call them starters. Anyone who creates a new
business is a starter. You don't need an MBA, a certificate, a fancy suit, a briefcase, or an
above-average tolerance for risk. You just need an idea, a touch of confidence, and a push
to get started.*Leslie Berlin, "Try, Try Again, or Maybe Not," New York Times, Mar. 21,

-- 13 of 128 --

2009.
CHAPTER
GO
Make a dent in the universe
To do great work, you need to feel that you're making a difference. That you're
putting a meaningful dent in the universe. That you're part of something important.
This doesn't mean you need to find the cure for cancer. It's just that your efforts
need to feel valuable. You want your customers to say, "This makes my life better." You
want to feel that if you stopped doing what you do, people would notice.
You should feel an urgency about this too. You don't have forever. This is your

-- 14 of 128 --

life's work. Do you want to build just another me-too product or do you want to shake
things up? What you do is your legacy. Don't sit around and wait for someone else to
make the change you want to see. And don't think it takes a huge team to make that
difference either.
Look at Craigslist, which demolished the traditional classified-ad business. With
just a few dozen employees, the company generates tens of millions in revenue, has one
of the most popular sites on the Internet, and disrupted the entire newspaper business.
The Drudge Report, run by Matt Drudge, is just one simple page on the Web run
by one guy. Yet it's had a huge impact on the news industry--television producers, radio
talk show hosts and newspaper reporters 