

-- 1 of 271 --

START WITH	START WITH	START WITH	START WITH
WHY	WHY	WHY	WHY
HOW GREAT LEADERS INSPIRE
EVERYONE TO TAKE ACTION
SIMON SINEK	SIMON SINEK	SIMON SINEK	SIMON SINEK
PORTFOLIO

-- 2 of 271 --

PORTFOLIO
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A. Penguin Group (Canada), 90
Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England
Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) Penguin Books
Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia
Group Pty Ltd)
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park,New Delhi- 110017, India
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632,
New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd)
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue,
Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England
First published in 2009 by Portfolio, a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
7 9 10 8 6
Copyright © Simon Sinek, 2009 All rights reserved
"The Sneetches" from The Sneetches and Other Stories by Dr. Seuss. Trademark TM and copyright © by Dr. Seuss
Enterprises, L.P. 1953,1954,1961, renewed 1989. All rights reserved. Used by permission of Random House
Children's Books, a division of Random House, Inc. and International Creative Management, Inc., agents for Dr.
Seuss Enterprises, L.P.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS C ATALO GIN G -1N - P UBLI C AT IO N DATA Sinek, Simon.
Start with why: how great leaders inspire everyone to take action / by Simon Sinek. p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-1-59184-280-4 1. Leadership. I. Tide. HD57.7.S549 2009
658.4*092—dc22 2009021862
Printed in the United States of America Set in Minion
Designed by Victoria Hartman
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the
copyright owner and the above publisher of this book.
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without the
permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only authorized electronic editions
and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrightable materials. Your support of the author's
rights is appreciated.
While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone numbers and Internet addresses at the
time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any responsibility for errors, or for changes
that occur after publication. Further, publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any
responsibility for author or third-party Web sites or their content.

-- 3 of 271 --

For Victoria,
who finds good ideas
and makes them great

-- 4 of 271 --

There are leaders and there are those who lead. Leaders
hold a position of power or influence. Those who lead
inspire us.
Whether individuals or organizations, we follow those who lead
not because we have to, but because we want to. We follow those
who lead not for them, but for ourselves.
This is a book for those who want to inspire others and for those
who want to find someone to inspire them.

-- 5 of 271 --

CONTENTS
Introduction: Why Start with Why? 1
PART 1	PART 1	PART 1	PART 1:::: A WORLD THAT DOESN'T START WITH WHY
1. Assume You Know 11
2. Carrots and Sticks 17
PART	PART	PART	PART 2: AN ALTERNATIVE PERSPECTIVE
3. The Golden Circle 41
4. This Is Not Opinion, This Is Biology 57
5. Clarity, Discipline and Consistency 71
PART	PART	PART	PART 3: LEADERS NEED A FOLLOWING
6. The Emergence of Trust 91
7. How a Tipping Point Tips 127
PART 4:	PART 4:	PART 4:	PART 4: HOW TO RALLY THOSE WHO BELIEVE
8. Start with WHY, but Know HOW 147
9. Know WHY. Know HOW. Then WHAT? 171
10. Communication Is Not About Speaking,
It's About Listening 179

-- 6 of 271 --

PART 5:	PART 5:	PART 5:	PART 5: THE BIGGEST CHALLENGE IS SUCCESS
11. When WHY Goes Fuzzy 195
12. Split Happens 205
PART 6:	PART 6:	PART 6:	PART 6: DISCOVER WHY
13. The Origins of a WHY 233
14. The New Competition 247
Acknowledgments 251
Notes 257

-- 7 of 271 --

1
INTRODUCTION	INTRODUCTION	INTRODUCTION	INTRODUCTION
WHY START WITH WHY?
This book is about a naturally occurring pattern, a way of thinking,
acting and communicating that gives some leaders the ability to
inspire those around them. Although these "natural-born leaders"
may have come into the world with a predisposition to inspire, the
ability is not reserved for them exclusively. We can all learn this
pattern. With a little discipline, any leader or organization can in-
spire others, both inside and outside their organization, to help
advance their ideas and their vision. We can all learn to lead.
The goal of this book is not simply to try to fix the things that
aren't working. Rather, I wrote this book as a guide to focus on and
amplify the things that do work. I do not aim to upset the solutions
offered by others. Most of the answers we get, when based on sound
evidence, are perfectly valid. However, if we're starting with the
wrong questions, if we don't understand the cause, then even the
right answers will always steer us wrong ... eventually. The truth,
you see, is always revealed... eventually.
The stories that follow are of those individuals and organizations
that naturally embody this pattern. They are the ones that start with
Why.

-- 8 of 271 --

START WITH WHY
2
1.
The goal was ambitious. Public interest was high. Experts were
eager to contribute. Money was readily available.
Armed with every ingredient for success, Samuel Pierpont
Langley set out in the early 1900s to be the first man to pilot an
airplane. Highly regarded, he was a senior officer at the Smithso-
nian Institution, a mathematics professor who had also worked at
Harvard. His friends included some of the most powerful men in
government and business, including Andrew Carnegie and Alexan-
der Graham Bell. Langley was given a $50,000 grant from the War
Department to fund his project, a tremendous amount of money for
the time. He pulled together the best minds of the day, a veritable
dream team of talent and know-how. Langley and his team used the
finest materials, and the press followed him everywhere. People all
over the country were riveted to the story, waiting to read that he
had achieved his goal. With the team he had gathered and ample
resources, his success was guaranteed.
Or was it?
A few hundred miles away, Wilbur and Orville Wright were
working on their own flying machine. Their passion to fly was so
intense that it inspired the enthusiasm and commitment of a ded-
icated group in their hometown of Dayton, Ohio. There was no
funding for their venture. No government grants. No high-level
connections. Not a single person on the team had an advanced
degree or even a college education, not even Wilbur or Orville. But
the team banded together in a humble bicycle shop and made their
vision real. On December 17, 1903, a small group witnessed a man
take flight for the first time in history.
How did the Wright brothers succeed where a better-equipped,
better-funded and better-educated team could not?

-- 9 of 271 --

WHY STAR WITH WHY
3
It wasn't luck. Both the Wright brothers and Langley were highly
motivated. Both had a strong work ethic. Both had keen scientific
minds. They were pursuing exactly the same goal, but only the
Wright brothers were able to inspire those around them and truly
lead their team to develop a technology that would change the
world. Only the Wright brothers started with Why.
2.
In 1965, students on the campus of the University of California,
Berkeley, were the first to publicly burn their draft cards to protest
America's involvement in the Vietnam War. Northern California
was a hotbed of antigovernment and antiestablishment sentiment;
footage of clashes and riots in Berkeley and Oakland was beamed
around the globe, fueling sympathetic movements across the United
States and Europe. But it wasn't until 1976, nearly three years after
the end of America's military involvement in the Vietnam conflict,
that a different revolution ignited.
They aimed to make an impact, a very big impact, even chal-
lenge the way people perceived how the world worked. But these
young revolutionaries did not throw stones or take up arms against
an authoritarian regime. Instead, they decided to beat the system at
its own game. For Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs, the cofounders of
Apple Computer, the battlefield was business and the weapon of
choice was the personal computer.
The personal computer revolution was beginning to brew when
Wozniak built the Apple I. Just starting to gain attention, the tech-
nology was primarily seen as a tool for business. Computers were
too complicated and out of the price range of the average individ-
ual. But Wozniak, a man not motivated by money, envisioned a
nobler purpose for the technology. He saw the personal computer
as a way for the little man to take on a corporation. If he could

-- 10 of 271 --

START WITH WHY
4
figure out a way to get it in the hands of the individual, he thought,
the computer would give nearly anyone the ability to perform many
of the same functions as a vastly better resourced company. The
personal computer could level the playing field and change the way
the world operated. Woz designed the Apple I, and improved the
technology with the Apple II, to be affordable and simple to use.
No matter how visionary or how brilliant, a great idea or a great
product isn't worth much if no one buys it. Wozniak's best friend at
the time, the twenty-one-year-old Steve Jobs, knew exactly what to
do. Though he had experience selling surplus electronics parts, Jobs
would prove to be much more than a good salesman. He wanted to
do something significant in the world, and building a company was
how he was going to do it. Apple was the tool he used to ignite his
revolution.
In their first year in business, with only one product, Apple
made a million dollars in revenues. By year two, they did $10 mil-
lion in sales. In their fourth year they sold $100 million worth of
computers. And in just six years, Apple Computer was a billion-
dollar company with over 3,000 employees.
Jobs and Woz were not the only people taking part in the per-
sonal computer revolution. They weren't the only smart guys in the
business; in fact, they didn't know much about business at all. What
made Apple special was not their ability to build such a fast-growth
company. It wasn't their ability to think differently about personal
computers. What has made Apple special is that they've been able to
repeat the pattern over and over and over. Unlike any of their
competitors, Apple has successfully challenged conventional think-
ing within the computer industry, the small electronics industry, the
music industry, the mobile phone industry and the broader
entertainment industry. And the reason is simple. Apple inspires.
Apple starts with Why.

-- 11 of 271 --

WHY STAR WITH WHY
5
3.
He was not perfect. He had his complexities. He was not the only
one who suffered in a pre-civil rights America, and there were
plenty of other charismatic speakers. But Martin Luther King Jr. had
a gift. He knew how to inspire people.
Dr. King knew that if the civil rights movement was to succeed,
if there was to be a real, lasting change, it would take more than him
and his closest allies. It would take more than rousing words and
eloquent speeches. It would take people, tens of thousands of
average citizens, united by a single vision, to change the country. At
11:00 a.m. on August 28, 1963, they would send a message to Wash-
ington that it was time for America to steer a new course.
The organizers of the civil rights movement did not send out
thousands of invitations, nor was there a Web site to check the date.
But the people came. And they kept coming and coming. All told, a
quarter of a million people descended on the nation's capital in time
to hear the words immortalized by history, delivered by the man
who would lead a movement that would change America forever: "I
have a dream."
The ability to attract so many people from across the country, of
all colors and races, to join together on the right day, at the right
time, took something special. Though others knew what had to
change in America to bring about civil rights for all, it was Martin
Luther King who was able to inspire a country to change not just for
the good of a minority, but for the good of everyone. Martin
Luther King started with Why.
. . .
There are leaders and there are those who lead. With only 6 percent
market share in the United States and about 3 percent worldwide,
Apple is not a leading manufacturer of home computers. Yet the
company leads the computer industry and is now a leader in other

-- 12 of 271 --

START WITH WHY
6
industries as well. Martin Luther King's experiences were not
unique, yet he inspired a nation to change. The Wright brothers
were not the strongest contenders in the race to take the first
manned, powered flight, but they led us into a new era of aviation
and, in doing so, completely changed the world we live in.
Their goals were not different than anyone else's, and their sys-
tems and processes were easily replicated. Yet the Wright brothers,
Apple and Martin Luther King stand out among their peers. They
stand apart from the norm and their impact is not easily copied.
They are members of a very select group of leaders who do some-
thing very, very special. They inspire us.
Just about every person or organization needs to motivate others
to act for some reason or another. Some want to motivate a purchase
decision. Others are looking for support or a vote. Still others are
keen to motivate the people around them to work harder or smarter
or just follow the rules. The ability to motivate people is not, in
itself, difficult. It is usually tied to some external factor. Tempting
incentives or the threat of punishment will often elicit the behavior
we desire. General Motors, for example, so successfully motivated
people to buy their products that they sold more cars than any other
automaker in the world for over seventy- seven years. Though they
were leaders in their industry, they did not lead.
Great leaders, in contrast, are able to inspire people to act. Those
who are able to inspire give people a sense of purpose or belonging
that has little to do with any external incentive or benefit to be
gained. Those who truly lead are able to create a following of people
who act not because they were swayed, but because they were
inspired. For those who are inspired, the motivation to act is deeply
personal. They are less likely to be swayed by incentives. Those who
are inspired are willing to pay a premium or endure inconvenience,
even personal suffering. Those who are able to inspire will create a
following of people—supporters, voters, customers, workers—who

-- 13 of 271 --

WHY STAR WITH WHY
7
act for the good of the whole not because they have to, but because
they want to.
Though relatively few in number, the organizations and leaders
with the natural ability to inspire us come in all shapes and sizes.
They can be found in both the public and private sectors. They are
in all sorts of industries—selling to consumers or to other busi-
nesses. Regardless of where they exist, they all have a dispropor-
tionate amount of influence in their industries. They have the most
loyal customers and the most loyal employees. They tend to be more
profitable than others in their industry. They are more innovative,
and most importantly, they are able to sustain all these things over
the long term. Many of them change industries. Some of them even
change the world.
The Wright brothers, Apple and Dr. King are just three exam-
pies. Harley-Davidson, Disney and Southwest Airlines are three
more. John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan were also able to inspire.
No matter from where they hail, they all have something in
common. All the inspiring leaders and companies, regardless of size
or industry, think, act and communicate exactly alike.
And it's the complete opposite of everyone else.
What if we could all learn to think, act and communicate like
those who inspire? I imagine a world in which the ability to inspire
is practiced not just by a chosen few, but by the majority. Studies
show that over 80 percent of Americans do not have their dream job.
If more knew how to build organizations that inspire, we could live
in a world in which that statistic was the reverse—a world in which
over 80 percent of people loved their jobs. People who love going to
work are more productive and more creative. They go home
happier and have happier families. They treat their colleagues and
clients and customers better. Inspired employees make for stronger
companies and stronger economies. That is why I wrote this book. I
hope to inspire others to do the things that inspire them so that

-- 14 of 271 --

START WITH WHY
8
together we may build the companies, the economy and a world in
which trust and loyalty are the norm and not the exception. This
book is not designed to tell you what to do or how to do it. Its goal
is not to give you a course of action. Its goal is to offer you the cause
of action.
For those who have an open mind for new ideas, who seek to
create long-lasting success and who believe that your success re-
quires the aid of others, I offer you a challenge. From now on, start
with Why.

-- 15 of 271 --

ASSUME YOU KNOW
9
PART I
A WORLD THAT
DOESN'T START
WITH WHY

-- 16 of 271 --

START WITH WHY
10

-- 17 of 271 --

11
1
ASSUME YOU KNOW
On a cold January day, a forty-three-year-old man was
sworn in as the chief executive of his country. By his side
stood his predecessor, a famous general who, fifteen years
earlier, had commanded his nation's armed forces in a war
that resulted in the defeat of Germany. The young leader
was raised in the Roman Catholic faith. He spent the next
five hours watching parades in his honor and stayed up
celebrating until three o'clock in the morning.
You know who I'm describing, right?
It's January 30, 1933, and I'm describing Adolf Hitler and not, as
most people would assume, John F. Kennedy.
The point is, we make assumptions. We make assumptions about
the world around us based on sometimes incomplete or false
information. In this case, the information I offered was incomplete.
Many of you were convinced that I was describing John F. Kennedy
until I added one minor little detail: the date.
This is important because our behavior is affected by our as-
sumptions or our perceived truths. We make decisions based on
what we think we know. It wasn't too long ago that the majority of

-- 18 of 271 --

START WITH WHY
12
people believed the world was flat. This perceived truth impacted
behavior. During this period, there was very little exploration. Peo-
ple feared that if they traveled too far they might fall off the edge of
the earth. So for the most part they stayed put. It wasn't until that
minor detail was revealed—the world is round—that behaviors
changed on a massive scale. Upon this discovery, societies began to
traverse the planet. Trade routes were established; spices were
traded. New ideas, like mathematics, were shared between societies
which unleashed all kinds of innovations and advancements. The
correction of a simple false assumption moved the human race
forward.
Now consider how organizations are formed and how decisions
are made. Do we really know why some organizations succeed and
why others don't, or do we just assume