

-- 1 of 247 --

Strategy
b e y o n d t h e
hockey 	Stick

-- 2 of 247 --



-- 3 of 247 --

Strategy
b e y o n d t h e
hockey 	Stick
P e o P l e , 	P r o b a b i l i t i e s , 	a n d
b i g M o v e s 	t o 	b e at t h e 	o d d s
C h r i s B r a d l e y | M a r t i n h i r t | sv e n s M i t
M c K i n s e y & c O M P A n y

-- 4 of 247 --

Cover image: Jeremy Banks (Banx)
Cover design: Wiley
Cartoons: Mike Shapiro created signed cartoons and Jeremy Banks (Banx) created all others
Copyright © 2018 by McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise,
except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests
to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online
at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other
damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact
our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United
States at (317) 572-3993, or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-
demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you
purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information
about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
ISBN 978-1-119-48762-3 (Hardcover)
ISBN 978-1-119-48763-0 (ePDF)
ISBN 978-1-119-48760-9 (ePub)
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

-- 5 of 247 --

To
Bini, Walter, and Hildegund Hirt
Bibi, Jan-Ferdel, and Ute Smit
Mel, Olivia, Alice, and Harriet Bradley
And to our
Partners and Colleagues at McKinsey & Company
for giving us the opportunity to beat the odds.

-- 6 of 247 --



-- 7 of 247 --

vii
Contents
Introduction: Welcome to the strategy room 	1
You are not alone 	2
The villain is the social side of strategy 	4
Where is the outside view? 	6
Making big moves happen 	8
The journey ahead of us 	9
1. Games in the strategy room—and why people play them 	13
The social side of strategy, in action 	15
The dreaded hockey stick 	17
Can we handle the truth? 	20
Playing the inside game 	21
Send in the guru 	22
The wrong problem for human brains 	23
The biased mind 	25
Now . . . add social dynamics to the mix 	27
When the inside view remains unchecked 	31
2. Opening the windows of your strategy room 	37
The right yardstick 	40
Your business lives on a Power Curve 	42
What we see on the map 	44
Why you are where you are 	49
A fresh perspective with the outside view 	53
3. Hockey stick dreams, hairy back realities 	57
The rise of the hairy back 	58
Getting to yes 	60
A haircut from finance 	60
Bold forecasts 	62
Timid plans 	68
Corporate peanut butter 	70
Shooting for the known 	70
Real hockey sticks 	72

-- 8 of 247 --

viii 	C o N T e N T S
4. What are the odds? 	75
The knowable probability of success 	77
Flight paths of the upwardly mobile 	80
A tale of three companies 	83
Where are the odds in the strategy room? 	85
The push for certainty 	87
You are your numbers 	89
5. How to find the real hockey stick 	93
What’s different this time? 	94
Check the facts 	95
The odds that matter: Yours 	96
The 10 variables that make the difference 	99
endowment 	100
Trends 	101
Moves 	102
It all matters 	103
The mobility dashboard 	105
Know the odds 	109
Is that all? 	110
6. The writing is on the wall 	115
A very different conversation about strategy 	118
Tennis or badminton? 	119
Industries are escalators 	120
Change your industry or change industries 	123
Consider changing locations, too 	124
Go micro 	125
The need for privileged insights 	127
Acting on the writing on the wall 	128
The four stages of a disruptive trend 	130
Stage one: Signals amid the noise 	132
Stage two: Change takes hold 	134
Stage three: The inevitable transformation 	136
The hardest stage 	136
Stage four: Adapting to the new normal 	139

-- 9 of 247 --

C o N T e N T S 	ix
7. Making the right (big) moves 	143
Big moves are essential 	146
Corning’s story 	150
Programmatic M&A and divestitures 	150
Active resource re-allocation 	152
To re-allocate, you have to de-allocate 	156
Strong capital programs 	156
Caution on capex 	158
Distinctive productivity improvement 	158
Running fast and getting nowhere 	159
Differentiation improvement 	162
Are you playing to your advantage? 	165
Big moves make for good strategy 	166
8. Eight shifts to unlock strategy 	173
From annual planning . . . to strategy as a journey 	175
From getting to “yes” . . . to debating real alternatives 	177
From peanut butter . . . to picking your 1-in-10s 	181
From approving budgets . . . to making big moves 	184
From budget inertia . . . to liquid resources 	188
From sandbagging . . . to open risk portfolios 	190
From “you are your numbers” . . . to a holistic performance view 	193
From long-range planning . . . to forcing the first step 	196
The package deal 	198
Epilogue: New life in the strategy room 	201
Acknowledgments 	205
Appendix 	207
About our sample and method 	207
A note on economic profit and total returns to shareholders 	209
How the odds look different from the top or bottom 	209
Life at the top 	211
Life at the bottom 	211
Notes 	215
Index 	227

-- 10 of 247 --



-- 11 of 247 --

1
Introduction
Welcome to the
strategy room
In the strategy room, human bias and social dynamics can
prevent the necessary big moves from getting on the table, let
alone getting executed. In this book we arm ourselves with
hard data from thousands of companies to take the “social side
of strategy” head on.
I
sn’t there another way?”
We hear that all the time, and you must have asked yourself
that question, too—probably more than once. Perhaps after an
exhausting marathon of strategy sessions that are supposed to be discus-
sions but really are just presentations. Perhaps after feeling compelled
to say “yes” to another investment proposal with uncertain prospects.
Perhaps after one of the usual discussions to re-allocate resources to
growth opportunities that go nowhere.

-- 12 of 247 --

2 	S t r at e g y b e y o n d t h e h o c k e y S t I c k
over decades of working with hundreds of the most senior business
leaders around the world, we agreed:
“there has to be another way . . .”
books about improving the strategy process fill our shelves,
packed with frameworks and anecdotes that claim to crack the code
of successful strategy. 1 as interesting as these books are to read, as
inspiring as their case examples are, it seems we are still short a
breakthrough. today’s strategic challenges are, in fact, very similar
to what they’ve been over the ages, despite the serious efforts of a lot
of smart people.
this book belongs on a different shelf. rather than relying on the
traditional approach of best practices and inspiring anecdotes, we use
broad and deep empirical research. We have identified a small num-
ber of performance levers that, according to the factual evidence we
compiled—and our experience in implementing them—can be used to
greatly increase your odds of success. We believe we’ve also found the
one—often overlooked—factor responsible for many of the conun-
drums facing us in the strategy room, the one factor that has perplexed
generations of business leaders, the factor that causes so many strate-
gies to not work out as planned. that factor is what we call the social
side of strategy.
In this book, we use empirical insights to finally help you and other
business leaders chart a course to address the social side of strategy and,
as a result, develop better, bigger, bolder strategies.
there is another way!
You are not alone
as we begin our journey together through the empirics and the social
side of strategy, let’s peer into the strategy room and look at some of
the scenes playing out there. these scenes probably feel familiar to
you because they are surprisingly common despite all those books and
articles about how to get to better strategy, better decisions, and better
business performance.
as the strategy process starts, the team agrees that this year you
will avoid huge documents with 150 slides and endless appendices.
you commit to having real conversations about the future of the

-- 13 of 247 --

W e l c o m e t o t h e S t r at e g y r o o m 	3
business and the tough choices you’ll have to make. then, two days
before the first meeting, three of those 150-page documents land in
the ceo’s in-box with a thud. So much for real conversations. you
are back wading through details in carefully scripted presentations
that numb the senses before anybody has a chance to fully grasp
the content.
or, you decide that you need to have a deep strategic rethink after
a stretch of indifferent results. the top team agrees on a change in
direction. the board approves. then the cFo takes over and turns
that vision into a first-year budget. the boldness oozes away as those
who stand to lose resources mount rear-guard actions and as other
immune responses to real changes kick in. Somehow, that bold rethink
produces a new budget that looks a lot like last year’s budget. It’s back
to business as usual.
how about a third scenario? the strategy is agreed on. It all looks
good on paper, and there is loads of compelling backup. but, some-
how, deep down, everybody senses that the strategy is nothing more
than hopeful thinking. It is a little too kind to the egos of the people
who made it and a little too unwilling to embrace the harsh reality of
competition. People two or three levels down in the organization—the
ones who engage with actual customers, the ones who often weren’t
really part of the strategy process—conclude that management is
stuck in a bubble, roll their eyes, and just get on with what they were
doing. all that “new” strategy ends up being good for is justifying some
uneconomic projects—the ones labeled “strategic” because they lose

-- 14 of 247 --

4 	S t r at e g y b e y o n d t h e h o c k e y S t I c k
money; everybody knows that no real change in trajectory will happen
because of them.
even if you are the ceo, it can feel at times as if the inertia caused
by individual behaviors and social dynamics is rather hard to deal
with—and getting in the way of doing the right thing for your busi-
ness. one of our client ceos in australia recently reflected: “I am well
aware of the fact that we should be moving faster in that direction, but
I have to bring the team along.”
you might be in the enviable position of leading an agile start-up
or an amazing, amazon-scale institution that still operates like it did
on day 1. If so, congratulations. you may find some of the empirics in
this book interesting because of what they show about what works and
what doesn’t in strategies, but you should really just keep doing what
you’re doing. If you are like the managers we more commonly come
across, however, you will easily recognize the symptoms we are talking
about and be keen to confront the social side of strategy. and even if
you are amazon-like, you might use some of the insights shared here
to see a slip coming ahead of time.
The villain is the social side of strategy
We all know that we go into the strategy process loaded with indi-
vidual and institutional biases and that group dynamics in the strat-
egy room often distort results. but that’s where the thinking about
social dynamics usually ends. how often are we making an explicit
effort to understand these factors and to properly deal with them?
don’t we tend to shrug our shoulders and soldier on? too often, we
seem to pretend that the strategy process is just about solving an
analytical problem, knowing deep down that the analysis is really
the easy part.
Frameworks and tools, the likes of which you find in your typ-
ical business book or consulting deck, can be useful in structuring
your thinking and can help generate ideas. Unfortunately, they usu-
ally don’t help us break through the real barriers to good strategy.
the simple reason: the social side of strategy can overwhelm the
intellectual side.

-- 15 of 247 --

W e l c o m e t o t h e S t r at e g y r o o m 	5
Peter drucker famously said that “culture eats strategy for break-
fast.”2 nowhere is that more evident than in the strategy room. how
can that be? after all, that room is full of smart and experienced peo-
ple who welcome an intellectual challenge. but strategy isn’t the only
thing that’s at stake here. Jobs—even careers—are on the line, too. you
can lose your job or status if you overpromise or under-deliver on your
performance goals. So, not surprisingly, caution reigns—and a strategy
process that is about job protection rarely produces the best outcomes
for the company. the budget process intrudes, too. you may be discuss-
ing a 5-year strategy, but everyone knows that what really matters is
the first-year budget. Inevitably, other sorts of games are played. most
managers, for instance, will try to secure resources for the coming year
while deferring accountability for the returns on these investments as
far as possible into the future—maybe even long enough that people
will have forgotten about the original commitments, or that they
themselves will have moved on to the next position. even the most
successful business leaders are human, after all.
the strategy room is full of so many competing agendas and social
games that you might have sometimes wondered why people spent so
much time and effort on the analysis and presentation preparations in
the first place.
the outcome of all these dynamics is the hockey stick, confidently
showing future success after the all-too-familiar dip on next year’s

-- 16 of 247 --

6 	S t r at e g y b e y o n d t h e h o c k e y S t I c k
budget. truly, if ever there was one, the hockey stick is the icon of
the strategy process. If we just mention the phrase, we get a knowing
glance and a wry smile from the executives we’ve shared our research
with.
With this book, we want to break the hockey stick. We want to
address the social side of strategy, so the big moves that drive economic
profit and shareholder value can actually happen.
Where is the outside view?
For more than 5 years now, the three of us have invested in understand-
ing why things get bogged down so easily in the strategy process and on
developing a new angle on how to deal with the issues. having spent
decades consulting with hundreds of companies across the globe, and
having seen countless strategic plans, we began this journey by draw-
ing on our personal observations. but we also decided to take our own
medicine: We have tried to push past the usual anecdotes and juxtaposed
experience with the reality of hard facts on corporate performance. We
supplemented our observations with detailed research and analysis of
several thousand of the world’s largest companies. these are big-sample
empirics—not the traditional collection of a few dozen, interview-based
case studies.
We found that in most strategy rooms there simply aren’t enough
data, and certainly not all the right data. that may seem to be an odd
statement, given our complaints about all those 150-page documents
and their endless appendices. but those documents tend to take too
narrow a view of the world. they are based on an “inside view”—the
data from your own industry, the perspective of your own company, and
the experience of your own team and of the executives in the strategy
room.3 the materials in strategy rooms today provide detail, but no
reference data with predictive power. Interestingly, the more detailed
the information you have, the more you lead yourself to believe that
you know; and the more your confidence grows, the higher the risk of
arriving at the wrong conclusions.4
When changing times demand a really big shift in strategy, this
inside view turns out to be even more of a problem. It’s an inside view
of the wrong world, and you are caught blindsided.

-- 17 of 247 --

W e l c o m e t o t h e S t r at e g y r o o m 	7
rather than an ever-more-precise inside view, strategy needs an
“outside view,” where data about the thousands of other experiences by
other executives and their companies in other strategy rooms are brought
into your own strategy room to shape the discussion. Why benchmark
just your operational kPIs when you could have an equally compel-
ling, objective reference point for your strategy? Why not calibrate how
good your strategy really is against a broad set of comparative data?
the problem, you might say, is that every situation is unique, right?
“no other company has our brand, our resources, our set of competitors,
our customers, our challenges, our opportunities.” and companies aren’t
exactly sharing all their data with the world to make it easy for you to com-
pare yourself against them, anyway. Well, yes. that’s why there never has
been a comprehensive database of strategic success and failure—until now.
We looked at publicly available information on dozens of vari-
ables for thousands of companies and found a manageable number
of levers—10, in fact—that explain over 80 percent of up-drift and
down-drift in corporate performance.5
We’ll share those data with you in this book, to give you that “out-
side view.” We will show you a way to see how your strategy stacks
up—before you ever leave the strategy room, and before you start to
execute your strategy. If you don’t think you’ve given yourself strong
enough odds of success, you can fall back, regroup, and reformulate
your strategy to improve your chances. all that, before you start down
a costly road that might just find another dead end. We will give you
a new way of gaining confidence in bold strategies that change the
direction of your business, because you will be able to now know

-- 18 of 247 --

8 	S t r at e g y b e y o n d t h e h o c k e y S t I c k
the chances of your strategy succeeding, calibrated against a verifiable
yardstick of corporate performance.
In the sports world, golf announcers can tell the odds that a pro
will make a putt of a certain length, because the data on all the putts
by all the pros have been compiled. Football stats buffs can tell you the
odds that a team will win based on the score, the quarter, the number
of first downs, and the name of the quarterback, because all that data
have been aggregated across league games over many years. the same
sort of data is now available about corporate strategy.
Making big moves happen
to get ahead of ourselves a little bit: the data show, i