The Big Short
Also by Michael Lewis
Home Game
Liar's Poker
The Money Culture
Pacific Rift
Losers
The New New Thing
Next
Moneyball
Coach
The Blind Side
EDITED BY MICHAEL LEWIS
Panic
The Big Short
INSIDE THE DOOMSDAY MACHINE
Michael Lewis
W. W. NORTON & COMPANY

-- 1 of 98 --

NEW YORK LONDON
Copyright (c) 2010 by Michael Lewis
All rights reserved
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to Permissions, W. W. Norton &
Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110
ISBN: 978-0-393-07819-0
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110
www.wwnorton.com
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd.
Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London W1T 3QT
For
Michael Kinsley
To whom I still owe an article
The most difficult subjects can be explained to the most slow-witted man if he has not formed any idea of them already; but the
simplest thing cannot be made clear to the most intelligent man if he is firmly persuaded that he knows already, without a shadow
of doubt, what is laid before him.
--Leo Tolstoy, 1897
Contents
Prologue Poltergeist
Chapter 1 A Secret Origin Story
Chapter 2 In the Land of the Blind
Chapter 3 "How Can a Guy Who Can't Speak English Lie?"
Chapter 4 How to Harvest a Migrant Worker
Chapter 5 Accidental Capitalists
Chapter 6 Spider-Man at The Venetian
Chapter 7 The Great Treasure Hunt
Chapter 8 The Long Quiet

-- 2 of 98 --

Chapter 9 A Death of Interest
Chapter 10 Two Men in a Boat
Epilogue Everything Is Correlated
Acknowledgments
PROLOGUE
Poltergeist
The willingness of a Wall Street investment bank to pay me hundreds of thousands of dollars to dispense investment
advice to grown-ups remains a mystery to me to this day. I was twenty-four years old, with no experience of, or
particular interest in, guessing which stocks and bonds would rise and which would fall. Wall Street's essential function
was to allocate capital: to decide who should get it and who should not. Believe me when I tell you that I hadn't the first
clue. I'd never taken an accounting course, never run a business, never even had savings of my own to manage. I'd
stumbled into a job at Salomon Brothers in 1985, and stumbled out, richer, in 1988, and even though I wrote a book
about the experience, the whole thing still strikes me as totally preposterous--which is one reason the money was so
easy to walk away from. I figured the situation was unsustainable. Sooner rather than later, someone was going to
identify me, along with a lot of people more or less like me, as a fraud. Sooner rather than later would come a Great
Reckoning, when Wall Street would wake up and hundreds, if not thousands, of young people like me, who had no
business making huge bets with other people's money or persuading other people to make those bets, would be
expelled from finance.
When I sat down to write my account of the experience--Liar's Poker, it was called--it was in the spirit of a young man
who thought he was getting out while the getting was good. I was merely scribbling down a message and stuffing it into
a bottle for those who passed through these parts in the far distant future. Unless some insider got all of this down on
paper, I figured, no future human would believe that it had happened.
Up to that point, just about everything written about Wall Street had been about the stock market. The stock market had
been, from the very beginning, where most of Wall Street lived. My book was mainly about the bond market, because
Wall Street was now making even bigger money packaging and selling and shuffling around America's growing debts.
This, too, I assumed was unsustainable. I thought that I was writing a period piece about the 1980s in America, when a
great nation lost its financial mind. I expected readers of the future would be appalled that, back in 1986, the CEO of
Salomon Brothers, John Gutfreund, was paid $3.1 million as he ran the business into the ground. I expected them to
gape in wonder at the story of Howie Rubin, the Salomon mortgage bond trader, who had moved to Merrill Lynch and
promptly lost $250 million. I expected them to be shocked that, once upon a time on Wall Street, the CEOs had only the
vaguest idea of the complicated risks their bond traders were running.
And that's pretty much how I imagined it; what I never imagined is that the future reader might look back on any of this,
or on my own peculiar experience, and say, "How quaint." How innocent. Not for a moment did I suspect that the
financial 1980s would last for two full decades longer, or that the difference in degree between Wall Street and ordinary
economic life would swell to a difference in kind. That a single bond trader might be paid $47 million a year and feel
cheated. That the mortgage bond market invented on the Salomon Brothers trading floor, which seemed like such a
good idea at the time, would lead to the most purely financial economic disaster in history. That exactly twenty years
after Howie Rubin became a scandalous household name for losing $250 million, another mortgage bond trader
named Howie, inside Morgan Stanley, would lose $9 billion on a single mortgage trade, and remain essentially
unknown, without anyone beyond a small circle inside Morgan Stanley ever hearing about what he'd done, or why.
When I sat down to write my first book, I had no great agenda, apart from telling what I took to be a remarkable tale. If
you'd gotten a few drinks in me and then asked what effect the book would have on the world, I might have said
something like, "I hope that college students trying to decide what to do with their lives might read it and decide that it's
silly to phony it up, and abandon their passions or even their faint interests, to become financiers." I hoped that some
bright kid at Ohio State University who really wanted to be an oceanographer would read my book, spurn the offer from
Goldman Sachs, and set out to sea.
Somehow that message was mainly lost. Six months after Liar's Poker was published, I was knee-deep in letters from

-- 3 of 98 --

students at Ohio State University who wanted to know if I had any other secrets to share about Wall Street. They'd read
my book as a how-to manual.
In the two decades after I left, I waited for the end of Wall Street as I had known it. The outrageous bonuses, the endless
parade of rogue traders, the scandal that sank Drexel Burnham, the scandal that destroyed John Gutfreund and
finished off Salomon Brothers, the crisis following the collapse of my old boss John Meriwether's Long-Term Capital
Management, the Internet bubble: Over and over again, the financial system was, in some narrow way, discredited. Yet
the big Wall Street banks at the center of it just kept on growing, along with the sums of money that they doled out to
twenty-six-year-olds to perform tasks of no obvious social utility. The rebellion by American youth against the money
culture never happened. Why bother to overturn your parents' world when you can buy it and sell off the pieces?
At some point, I gave up waiting. There was no scandal or reversal, I assumed, sufficiently great to sink the system.
Then came Meredith Whitney, with news. Whitney was an obscure analyst of financial firms for an obscure financial
firm, Oppenheimer and Co., who, on October 31, 2007, ceased to be obscure. On that day she predicted that
Citigroup had so mismanaged its affairs that it would need to slash its dividend or go bust. It's never entirely clear on
any given day what causes what inside the stock market, but it was pretty clear that, on October 31, Meredith Whitney
caused the market in financial stocks to crash. By the end of the trading day, a woman whom basically no one had ever
heard of, and who could have been dismissed as a nobody, had shaved 8 percent off the shares of Citigroup and $390
billion off the value of the U.S. stock market. Four days later, Citigroup CEO Chuck Prince resigned. Two weeks later,
Citigroup slashed its dividend.
From that moment, Meredith Whitney became E. F. Hutton: When she spoke, people listened. Her message was clear:
If you want to know what these Wall Street firms are really worth, take a cold, hard look at these crappy assets they're
holding with borrowed money, and imagine what they'd fetch in a fire sale. The vast assemblages of highly paid people
inside them were worth, in her view, nothing. All through 2008, she followed the bankers' and brokers' claims that they
had put their problems behind them with this write-down or that capital raise with her own claim: You're wrong. You're
still not facing up to how badly you have mismanaged your business. You're still not acknowledging billions of dollars in
losses on subprime mortgage bonds. The value of your securities is as illusory as the value of your people. Rivals
accused Whitney of being overrated; bloggers accused her of being lucky. What she was, mainly, was right. But it's true
that she was, in part, guessing. There was no way she could have known what was going to happen to these Wall
Street firms, or even the extent of their losses in the subprime mortgage market. The CEOs themselves didn't know.
"Either that or they are all liars," she said, "but I assume they really just don't know."
Now, obviously, Meredith Whitney didn't sink Wall Street. She'd just expressed most clearly and most loudly a view that
turned out to be far more seditious to the social order than, say, the many campaigns by various New York attorneys
general against Wall Street corruption. If mere scandal could have destroyed the big Wall Street investment banks, they
would have vanished long ago. This woman wasn't saying that Wall Street bankers were corrupt. She was saying that
they were stupid. These people whose job it was to allocate capital apparently didn't even know how to manage their
own.
I confess some part of me thought, If only I'd stuck around, this is the sort of catastrophe I might have created. The
characters at the center of Citigroup's mess were the very same people I'd worked with at Salomon Brothers; a few of
them had been in my Salomon Brothers training class. At some point I couldn't contain myself: I called Meredith
Whitney. This was back in March 2008, just before the failure of Bear Stearns, when the outcome still hung in the
balance. I thought, If she's right, this really could be the moment when the financial world gets put back into the box from
which it escaped in the early 1980s. I was curious to see if she made sense, but also to know where this young woman
who was crashing the stock market with her every utterance had come from.
She'd arrived on Wall Street in 1994, out of the Brown University Department of English. "I got to New York and I didn't
even know research existed," she says. She'd wound up landing a job at Oppenheimer and Co. and then had the most
incredible piece of luck: to be trained by a man who helped her to establish not merely a career but a worldview. His
name, she said, was Steve Eisman. "After I made the Citi call," she said, "one of the best things that happened was
when Steve called and told me how proud he was of me." Having never heard of Steve Eisman, I didn't think anything
of this.
But then I read the news that a little-known New York hedge fund manager named John Paulson had made $20 billion
or so for his investors and nearly $4 billion for himself. This was more money than anyone had ever made so quickly on
Wall Street. Moreover, he had done it by betting against the very subprime mortgage bonds now sinking Citigroup and
every other big Wall Street investment bank. Wall Street investment banks are like Las Vegas casinos: They set the

-- 4 of 98 --

odds. The customer who plays zero-sum games against them may win from time to time but never systematically, and
never so spectacularly that he bankrupts the casino. Yet John Paulson had been a Wall Street customer. Here was the
mirror image of the same incompetence Meredith Whitney was making her name pointing out. The casino had
misjudged, badly, the odds of its own game, and at least one person had noticed. I called Whitney again to ask her, as I
was asking others, if she knew anyone who had anticipated the subprime mortgage cataclysm, thus setting himself up
in advance to make a fortune from it. Who else had noticed, before the casino caught on, that the roulette wheel had
become predictable? Who else inside the black box of modern finance had grasped the flaws of its machinery?
It was then late 2008. By then there was a long and growing list of pundits who claimed they predicted the catastrophe,
but a far shorter list of people who actually did. Of those, even fewer had the nerve to bet on their vision. It's not easy to
stand apart from mass hysteria--to believe that most of what's in the financial news is wrong, to believe that most
important financial people are either lying or deluded--without being insane. Whitney rattled off a list with a half-dozen
names on it, mainly investors she had personally advised. In the middle was John Paulson. At the top was Steve
Eisman.
The Big Short
CHAPTER ONE
A Secret Origin Story
Eisman entered finance about the time I exited it. He'd grown up in New York City, gone to yeshiva schools, graduated
from the University of Pennsylvania magna cum laude, and then with honors from Harvard Law School. In 1991 he was
a thirty-year-old corporate lawyer wondering why he ever thought he'd enjoy being a lawyer. "I hated it," he says. "I
hated being a lawyer. My parents worked as brokers at Oppenheimer securities. They managed to finagle me a job.
It's not pretty but that's what happened."
Oppenheimer was among the last of the old-fashioned Wall Street partnerships and survived on the scraps left behind
by Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley. It felt less like a corporation than a family business. Lillian and Elliot Eisman
had been giving financial advice to individual investors on behalf of Oppenheimer since the early 1960s. (Lillian had
created their brokerage business inside of Oppenheimer, and Elliot, who had started out as a criminal attorney, had
joined her after being spooked once too often by midlevel Mafia clients.) Beloved and respected by colleagues and
clients alike, they could hire whomever they pleased. Before rescuing their son from his legal career they'd installed his
old nanny on the Oppenheimer trading floor. On his way to reporting to his mother and father, Eisman passed the
woman who had once changed his diapers. Oppenheimer had a nepotism rule, however; if Lillian and Elliot wanted to
hire their son, they had to pay his salary for the first year, while others determined if he was worth paying at all.
Eisman's parents, old-fashioned value investors at heart, had always told him that the best way to learn about Wall
Street was to work as an equity analyst. He started in equity analysis, working for the people who shaped public
opinion about public companies. Oppenheimer employed twenty-five or so analysts, most of whose analysis went
ignored by the rest of Wall Street. "The only way to get paid as an analyst at Oppenheimer was being right and making
enough noise about it that people noticed it," says Alice Schroeder, who covered insurance companies for
Oppenheimer, moved to Morgan Stanley, and eventually wound up being Warren Buffett's official biographer. She
added, "There was a counterculture element to Oppenheimer. The people at the big firms were all being paid to be
consensus." Eisman turned out to have a special talent for making noise and breaking with consensus opinion. He
started as a junior equity analyst, a helpmate, not expected to offer his own opinions. That changed in December 1991,
less than a year into the new job. A subprime mortgage lender called Aames Financial went public, and no one at
Oppenheimer particularly cared to express an opinion about it. One of Oppenheimer's bankers, who hoped to be hired
by Aames, stomped around the research department looking for anyone who knew anything about the mortgage
business. "I'm a junior analyst and I'm just trying to figure out which end is up," says Eisman, "but I told him that as a
lawyer I'd worked on a deal for The Money Store." He was promptly appointed the lead analyst for Aames Financial.
"What I didn't tell him was that my job had been to proofread the documents and that I hadn't understood a word of the
fucking things."
Aames Financial, like The Money Store, belonged to a new category of firms extending loans to cash-strapped
Americans, known euphemistically as "specialty finance." The category did not include Goldman Sachs or J.P. Morgan
but did include many little-known companies involved one way or another in the early 1990s boom in subprime
mortgage lending. Aames was the first subprime mortgage lender to go public. The second company for which Eisman
was given sole responsibility was called Lomas Financial Corp. Lomas had just emerged from bankruptcy. "I put a sell
rating on the thing because it was a piece of shit. I didn't know that you weren't supposed to put sell ratings on

-- 5 of 98 --

companies. I thought there were three boxes--buy, hold, sell--and you could pick the one you thought you should." He
was pressured to be a bit more upbeat, but upbeat did not come naturally to Steve Eisman. He could fake upbeat, and
sometimes did, but he was happier not bothering. "I could hear him shouting into his phone from down the hall," says a
former colleague. "Joyfully engaged in bashing the stocks of the companies he covered. Whatever he's thinking, it
comes out of his mouth." Eisman stuck to his sell rating on Lomas Financial, even after the Lomas Financial
Corporation announced that investors needn't worry about its financial condition, as it had hedged its market risk. "The
single greatest line I ever wrote as an analyst," says Eisman, "was after Lomas said they were hedged." He recited the
line from memory: "'The Lomas Financial Corporation is a perfectly hedged financial institution: it loses money in every
conceivable interest rate environment.' I enjoyed writing that sentence more than any sentence I ever wrote." A few
months after he published that line, the Lomas Financial Corporation returned to bankruptcy.
Eisman quickly established himself as one of the few analysts at Oppenheimer whose opinions might stir the markets.
"It was like going back to school for me," he said. "I would learn about an industry and I would go and write a paper
about it." Wall Street people came to view him as a genuine character. He dressed half-fastidiously, as if someone had
gone to great trouble to buy him nice new clothes but not told him exactly how they should be worn. His short-cropped
blond hair looked as if he had cut it himself. The focal point of his soft, expressive, not unkind face was his mouth,
mainly because it was usually at least half open, even while he ate. It was as if he feared that he might not be able to
express whatever thought had just flitted through his mind quickly enough before the next one came, and so kept the
channel perpetually clear. His other features all arranged themselves, almost dutifully, around the incipient thought. It
was the opposite of a poker face.
In his dealings with the outside world, a pattern emerged. The growing number of people who worked for Steve
Eisman loved him, or were at least amused by him, and appreciated his willingness and ability to part with both his
money and his knowledge. "He's a born teacher," says one woman who worked for him. "And he's fiercely protective of
women." He identified with the little guy and the underdog without ever exactly being one himself. Important men who
might have expected from Eisman some sign of deference or respect, on the other hand, often came away from
encounters with him shocked and outraged. "A lot of people don't get Steve," Meredith Whitney had told me, "but the
people who get him love him." One of the people who didn't get Steve was the head of a large U.S. 