

-- 1 of 353 --



-- 2 of 353 --



-- 3 of 353 --

Contents
Title Page
Contents
Copyright
Dedication
Introduction
The Elements of Behavior
Motivation—Focus on Matching
Ability—Easy Does It
Prompts—The Power of After
Emotions Create Habits
Growing Your Habits from Tiny to Transformative
Untangling Bad Habits: A Systematic Solution
How We Change Together
The Small Changes That Change Everything
Acknowledgments
Appendixes
Three Hundred Recipes for Tiny Habits—Fifteen Life Situations
and Challenges
About the Author
Connect with HMH

-- 4 of 353 --

Copyright © 2020 by BJ Fogg
Tiny Habits® is a registered trademark
All rights reserved
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to
trade.permissions@hmhco.com or to Permissions, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company, 3
Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
hmhbooks.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Fogg, B. J., author.
Title: Tiny habits : the small changes that change everything / BJ Fogg, PhD.
Description: Boston : Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2019.
Identifiers: LCCN 2019023920 (print) | LCCN 2019023921 (ebook) | ISBN 9780358003328 (hardcover)
| ISBN 9780358003991 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Habit. | Change (Psychology)
Classification: LCC BF335 .F56 2019 (print) | LCC BF335 (ebook) | DDC 158—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019023920
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019023921
eISBN 978-0-358-00399-1
v1.1219
While all of the stories in this book are true, some names and identifying details have been changed to
protect confidentiality.
For references and resources related to this book, go to TinyHabits.com/resources.

-- 5 of 353 --

To the wonderful people who inspired me to explore.

-- 6 of 353 --

INTRODUCTION
Change Can Be Easy (and Fun)
Tiny is mighty.
At least when it comes to change.
Over the last twenty years, I’ve found that most everyone wants to make
some kind of change: eat healthier, lose weight, exercise more, reduce stress,
get better sleep. We want to be better parents and partners. We want to be
more productive and creative. But the alarming levels of obesity,
sleeplessness, and stress reported by the media—and seen in my Stanford
lab’s research—tell me there is a painful gap between what people want and
what they actually do. The disconnect between want and do has been blamed
on a lot of things—but people blame it on themselves for the most part. They
internalize the cultural message of “It’s your fault! You should exercise more,
but you aren’t doing it. Shame on you!”
I am here to say: It isn’t your fault.
And creating positive change isn’t as hard as you think.
For too many years, myths, misconceptions, and well-meaning but
unscientific advice have set you up to fail. If you’ve attempted change in the
past and haven’t seen results, you may have concluded that change is hard or
that you can’t succeed because you lack motivation. Neither is accurate. The
problem is with the approach itself, not with you. Think of it this way: If you
tried putting together a chest of drawers with faulty instructions and parts

-- 7 of 353 --

missing, you would feel frustrated. But you probably wouldn’t blame
yourself for this, would you? You would blame the manufacturer instead.
When it comes to failed attempts at change, we almost never blame the
“manufacturer.” We blame ourselves.
When our results fall short of our expectations, the inner critic finds an
opening and steps on stage. Many of us believe that if we fail to be more
productive, lose weight, or exercise regularly then something must be wrong
with us. If only we were better people, we wouldn’t have failed. If only we
had followed that program to the letter or kept those promises to ourselves,
we would have succeeded. We just need to get our act together and pull
ourselves up by our bootstraps and do better. Right?
Nope. Sorry. Not right.
We are not the problem.
Our approach to change is. It’s a design flaw—not a personal flaw.
Building habits and creating positive change can be easy—if you have the
right approach. A system based on how human psychology really works. A
process that makes change easier. Tools that don’t rely on guesswork or
faulty principles.
Popular thinking about habit formation and change feeds into our impulse
to set unrealistic expectations. We know habits matter; we just need more
good habits and fewer bad ones. But here we are, still struggling to change.
Still thinking it’s our fault. All my research and hands-on experience tell me
that this is exactly the wrong mindset. In order to design successful habits and
change your behaviors, you should do three things.
Stop judging yourself.
Take your aspirations and break them down into tiny behaviors.
Embrace mistakes as discoveries and use them to move forward.
This may not feel intuitive. I know it doesn’t come naturally to everyone.
Self-criticism is its own kind of habit. For some people, blaming yourself is
just where your brain goes—it’s like a sled in the snow, slipping into a well-
worn path down the hill.
If you follow the Tiny Habits process, you’ll start taking a different route.
Snow will quickly start covering those self-doubting grooves. The new path
will soon be the default path. This happens quickly, because with Tiny Habits

-- 8 of 353 --

you change best by feeling good—not by feeling bad. The process doesn’t
require you to rely on willpower, or set up accountability measures, or
promise yourself rewards. There is no magic number of days you have to do
something. Those approaches aren’t based on the way habits really work,
and as a result, they aren’t reliable methods for change. And they often make
us feel bad.
This book says good-bye to all that change angst and—even more
important—shows you how to easily and joyfully bridge the gap (no matter
the size) between who you are now and who you want to be. Tiny Habits
will be your guide to disrupting the old approach and replacing it with an
entirely new framework for change.
The system I’ll share with you is not guesswork. I’ve road tested the
process with more than 40,000 people during years of research and
refinement. By coaching all these people personally and gathering data week
by week, I know that the Tiny Habits method works. It replaces
misunderstandings with proven principles, and it trades prescriptions for
process. You’ll take what the cofounder of Instagram, my former student,
learned about human behavior to design a breakthrough app, and you’ll use
the same methods to create breakthrough changes in your own life—and the
lives of others. And best of all, you get to have fun. Once you remove any
hint of judgment, your behavior becomes a science experiment. A sense of
exploration and discovery is a prerequisite to success, not just an added
bonus.
Behavior Design
Welcome to Behavior Design! This is my comprehensive system for thinking
clearly about human behavior and for designing simple ways to transform
your life. My early work in Behavior Design helped innovators create
products that millions of people use every day to get fit, save money, drive
efficiently, and more. After seeing the power of these methods to successfully
design business solutions, I shifted my focus to the personal: How do we
change our own behavior? I got focused on changes that people want to make
for themselves. And when I looked in the mirror, I saw plenty that could be
improved on. I decided to do what every gung-ho scientist does at one time
or another—I experimented on myself.

-- 9 of 353 --

I tinkered with the behaviors I wanted to incorporate into my life. I did
silly things that turned out to be wildly successful, like doing two push-ups
after every time I pee. I did seemingly rational things that totally failed, like
trying to eat an orange every day at lunch. Whenever something didn’t work, I
went back to my models and analyzed what happened. I started seeing
patterns. I followed hunches. I pivoted. I iterated endlessly.
Even though I was a behavior scientist, I had to learn how to create habits
in my own life. It wasn’t obvious or natural for me; it was a deliberate
process. But with practice I turned a weakness into a strength, and six months
later, I had significantly changed my life. I lost twenty pounds and felt
healthier and stronger. I was working more productively and more effectively
than ever before. I started eating eggs and spinach for breakfast and
cauliflower with mustard as an afternoon snack, and I weeded out foods that
weren’t helping me. I started each day with an uplifting series of habits, and I
designed (and redesigned) my life and my environment to get better sleep. As
I figured this out, with twists and turns along the way, I realized that my
ability to change was increasing and my momentum was building. As I
accumulated dozens of new habits—mostly tiny ones—they combined to
create a transformation. Sustaining all this did not feel hard. Pursuing change
in this way felt natural and oddly fun.
The results delighted me, and I started teaching my methods to others in
2011. My research showed this approach worked for other people, too, and it
changed their lives. To my surprise and excitement, what started as a
whimsical self-exploration in the Behavior Design universe became a proven
method called Tiny Habits—the quickest, easiest vehicle for personal
transformation.
Before I go on, let me set the record straight: information alone does not
reliably change behavior. This is a common mistake people make, even well-
meaning professionals. The assumption is this: If we give people the right
information, it will change their attitudes, which in turn will change their
behaviors. I call this the “Information-Action Fallacy.” Many products and
programs—and well-meaning professionals—set out to educate people as a
way to change them. At professional conferences they say stuff like, “If
people just knew the facts, they would change!”
As you look at your own experiences, you’ll see that information alone did
not transform your life. And that’s certainly not your fault.

-- 10 of 353 --

In my research on habit formation, dating back to 2009, I’ve found that
there are only three things we can do that will create lasting change: Have an
epiphany, change our environment, or change our habits in tiny ways.
Creating a true epiphany for ourselves (or others) is difficult and probably
impossible. We should rule out that option unless we have magical powers (I
don’t). But here’s the good news: The other two options can lead to lasting
change if we follow the right program, and Tiny Habits gives us a new way
to tap the power of environment and baby steps.
Creating positive habits is the place to start, and creating tiny positive
habits is the path to developing much bigger ones. Once you know how Tiny
Habits works—and why it works—you can make big one-time changes. You
can disrupt unwanted habits. You can work up to bucket-list behaviors like
running a marathon.
I’ll help guide you through each of the different behavior-change scenarios
that you might encounter.
The essence of Tiny Habits is this: Take a behavior you want, make it tiny,
find where it fits naturally in your life, and nurture its growth. If you want to
create long-term change, it’s best to start small. Here’s why.
TINY IS FAST
Time. There’s never enough of it, and we always want more of it. We eat
drippy hamburgers in our cars and take conference calls while we’re at the
beach with our kids because we feel so pressed for time. This pressure leads
to a scarcity mindset—we believe that there will never be enough time, so
we say no to changes because we feel like we don’t have the hours to
cultivate new positive habits. Thirty minutes of exercise a day? Cooking a
healthy dinner every night? Writing daily in a gratitude journal? Forget it.
Who. Has. The. Time.
You could scold yourself down the path of change. Or you could make
your life a lot easier.
You could start tiny.
With the Tiny Habits method, you focus on small actions that you can do in
less than thirty seconds. You will quickly wire in new habits, and then they
will grow naturally. Starting tiny means you can begin creating a big change
without worrying about the time involved. With Tiny Habits, I advise people
to start with three very small behaviors or even just one. The more stressed
you are and the less time you have, the more appropriate this method is for

-- 11 of 353 --

you. No matter how much you want to cultivate a healthy habit, you won’t be
able to do it reliably if you start big. When you go big, the new habit
probably won’t stick. In many people’s lives, tiny isn’t just the best option, it
might be the only option.
TINY CAN START NOW
Tiny allows you to get real with yourself and your life. Tiny allows you to
start right now. It meets you where you are—whether your life is in a
desperate spiral or you are stressed out but otherwise fortunate. We all have
our own life circumstances to contend with, ways of thinking that aren’t
ideal, and quirks of psychology that hold us back. We could feel bummed and
ashamed about it, or we could use the Tiny Habits method to hack the system.
I won’t prescribe exact habits in this book. I’m sharing a method for
wiring in any habit you want. You pick the habits. But right here, right now,
I’m making an exception. I invite you to start practicing a new habit first thing
each and every morning. It’s simple. And it takes about three seconds. I call
it the Maui Habit.
After you put your feet on the floor in the morning, immediately say this
phrase, “It’s going to be a great day.” As you say these seven words, try to
feel optimistic and positive.
The recipe in Tiny Habits format looks like this.
My Recipe for the Maui Habit
After I . . . 	I will . . . 	To wire the habit into my brain, I will
immediately:
wake up and put
my feet on the
floor,
say, “It ’s going
to be a great
day.”
A simple recipe for starting each day in the best way using the Tiny Habits
method.

-- 12 of 353 --

Over the years, I’ve helped thousands of people bring the Maui Habit into
their lives, and the results have been excellent. It’s certainly been effective in
my own life. With the Maui Habit, you can start immediately—and almost
effortlessly—toward a better future.
Here are a few variations on this habit to consider.
Some people say a slightly different phrase each morning such as “Today
is going to be awesome.” If that phrase or some variation works better for
you, adjust as needed.
A few people have changed the timing. Some say this phrase when they
look in the mirror in the morning. I’m quite sure that wouldn’t work for me. (I
avoid looking in the mirror first thing. Yikes!) But if this spot in your routine
works best for you, then go for it.
I suggest you start with the classic version as written on the recipe card,
then modify it if needed.
When I do the Maui Habit each morning, I pause for two or three seconds
after I say the phrase. I’m still waking up at that point, and I want the idea to
sink in.
If you do the Maui Habit and feel that it won’t be a great day, I advise you
to still say this phrase. I say it even on mornings when I feel exhausted or
overwhelmed or anxious about the day ahead. In that moment, sitting on the
edge of my bed, I try to feel optimistic. But if this feels phony, then I adjust
the phrase and my intonation as I say, “It’s going to be a great day—
somehow.”
I find this oddly helpful even on my worst days. When I’m worried about
the day ahead, this statement—even when I say it with a question in my voice
—seems to open the door just a crack to actually having a good day. And
that’s exactly what happens most days.
Think of the Maui Habit as a simple practice you do each morning in about
three seconds. This will show you how easy it is to get started, and it will
help you learn the single most important skill in behavior change—feeling
successful.
TINY IS SAFE
A friend of mine has an eighteen-month-old baby named Willa who is new to
the whole walking thing. The other day Willa was running around our
driveway chasing my dog, Millie, and I watched Willa trip and fall about a

-- 13 of 353 --

half-dozen times. Scaling curbs and negotiating sewer grates is tricky
business for a toddler, but she kept popping right back up. Willa would
squawk a little bit here and there, but she wasn’t actually getting hurt, so why
not keep going? If I were the one learning to walk and crashing down on hard
pavement, I’d be pretty banged up. At my height—I’m more than six feet tall
—falling would hurt more.
The same concept applies to starting a new behavior or habit. If you have
never done yoga before, there are multiple places to start—but they all have
different levels of risk. You could decide to do one sun salutation or buy a
month of unlimited classes at your local studio or hop on a plane for a week-
long retreat in India. The investment of time and money and expectation is
wildly different with each option. Very few people would take off to India
without having stepped foot on a yoga mat. Why? Something in our lizard
brains inherently understands how high these stakes would be, which is why
it can feel hard to start something new if it is too big. If I can barely surf the
gentle waves at Cove Park in Maui, I wouldn’t dare surf the massive swells
at Jaws on the other side of Maui. I would likely get hurt, and I might lose all
my confidence in surfing, even on small waves. Why would I do that to
myself? It doesn’t sound fun. Better stick to Cove Park.
With Tiny Habits, risk doesn’t have to factor into the equation. Tiny can
also be undercover. You can start to change without making a big scene. No
one will sabotage you. This reduces the pressure on you.
Because these behaviors are so small and the program so flexible,
emotional risk is eliminated. There is no real failure in Tiny Habits. There
are little stumbles, but if you get up again, that’s not failure—that’s a habit in
the making.
TINY CAN GROW BIG
Over the last twenty years, I’ve found that the only consistent, sustainable
way to grow big is to start small. Amy, a former student of mine, was a stay-
at-home mom who was trying to get an educational-media company off the
ground. The idea of being her own boss and doing something she loved was
thrilling. But there was so much to think about: hiring new employees,
shopping around for office space, deciphering tax codes. She would
procrastinate the important stuff, like legal agreements, and chose to work on
tasks she loved, like designing her logo. But she was running out of time to
build her business plan, and the thought of the venture falling apart in her

-- 14 of 353 --

hands paralyzed her. Amy wanted to get her business off the ground, and she
kept making promises to herself that she’d tackle the big stuff soon—but
months after the talking, she still hadn’t done any walking.
A change myth was holding Amy back—the pervasive idea that you’ve got
to go big or go home. We live in an aspiration-driven culture that is rooted in
instant gratification. We find it difficult to enact or even accept incremental
progress. Which is exactly what you need to cultivate meaningful long-term
change. People get frustrated and demoralized when things don’t happen
quickly. It’s natural. It’s normal. But it’s another way we’re set up to fail.
When Amy found the Tiny Habits method, she discovered that the best way
to eat a monstrous whale—as little Melinda Mae did in Shel Silverstein’s
poem—was to take one bite at a time. Amy ditched go big or go home and
decided to go tiny. Every morning after dropping her daughter off at
kindergarten, she pulled over on the side of the road and wrote one to-do on
a sticky note. Just one. Each one was something she could accomplish right
away: send out one sales e-mail, schedule a project meeting, draft a quick
introduction to a patient guide. The simple act of focusing her energy on
writing down one task le